



CHARTLESS 

I never saw^ a moor, 

I never saw the sea; 

Yet now I know how the heather looks, 

And what a wave must be. 

I never spoke with God, 
Nor visited in Heaven ; 
Yet certain am I of the spot 
As if the chart were given. 



INDIAN SUMMER 

These are the days when birds come back, 
A very few, a bird or two, 
To take a backward look. 
4 



Emily Dickinson 

These are the days when skies put on 
The old, old sophistries of June, — 
A blue and gold mistake. 

Oh, fraud that can not cheat the bee. 
Almost thy plausibility 
Induces my belief. 

Till ranks of seeds their witness bear, 
And softly through the altered air 
Hurries a timid leaf ! 

Oh, sacrament of summer days, 
Oh, last communion in the haze. 
Permit a child to join, 

Thy sacred emblems to partake, 
Thy consecrated bread to break, 
Taste thine immortal wine! 



SUSPENSE 

Elysium is as far as to 

The very nearest room. 

If in that room a friend await 

Felicity or doom. 

What fortitude the soul contains. 
That it can so endure 
The accent of a coming foot. 
The opening of a door. 
5 



Emily Dickinson 

THE RAILWAY TRAIN 

I like to see it lap the miles, 
And lick the valleys up, 
And stop to feed itself at tanks; 
And then, prodigious, step 

Around a pile of mountains, 
And, supercilious, peer 
In shanties by the sides of roads; 
And then a quarry pare 

To fit its sides, and crawl between, 
Complaining all the while 
In horrid, hooting stanza; 
Then chase itself down hill 

And neigh like Boanerges; 
Then, punctual as a star. 
Stop — docile and omnipotent — 
At its own stable door. 

A CEMETERY 

This quiet Dust was Gentlemen and Ladies, 

And Lads and Girls; 
Was laughter and ability and sighing. 

And frocks and curls. 
This passive place a Summer's nimble mansion, 

Where Bloom and Bees 
Fulfilled their Oriental Circuit, 

Then ceased like these. 
6 



Emily Dickinson 

BECLOUDED 

The sky is low, the clouds are mean, 
A travelling flake of snow 
Across a barn or through a rut 
Debates if it will go. 

A narrow wind complains all day 
How some one treated him ; 
Nature, like us, is sometimes caught 
Without her diadem. 



Thomas Bailey Aldrich 

Thomas Bailey Aldrich was born in 1836 at Portsmouth, New 
Hampshire, where he spent most of the sixteen years which he 
has recorded in that delightful memoir, The Story of a Bad- 
Boy (1869). After a brief clerkship, he became junior literary 
critic of The Evening Mirror at nineteen, publishing his first 
book (The Bells), an immature collection of echoes, at the same 
time. From 1855 to 1866 he held various journalistic positions, 
associating himself with the leading metropolitan literati. But 
though Aldrich mingled with the New York group, he was not 
part of it; he longed for the more rarefied intellectual at- 
mosphere of New England and when, in i866, Osgood offered 
him the editorship of Every Saturday, published in Boston, 
Aldrich accepted with alacrity. A few years later he became 
editor of the famous Atlantic Monthly, holding that position 
from 1881 to 1890. 

Aldrich's work falls into two sharply-divided classes. The 
first half is full of overloaded phrase-making, fervid extrava- 
gances; the reader sinks beneath clouds of damask, azure, 

7 



Thomas Bailey Aldrich 

emerald, pearl and gold; he is drowned '^^ -^'l^^^^^l' desks', 
tiger-lilies, spice, soft mu^c, orch.ds, -^^^'^2r.\s con- 
There is no real air in "^ese verses; .. 
ceived by a poet reading the Arabian Nights " 
In company with Stoddard and Taylor, he dwelt .n a terary 
Orientalism-(Stoddard's Book of the East foHowed fast upon 
Taylor's Poems of the Orient)— and Aldrich's Cloth of Gold 
was suffused with similar " vanilla-flavored adjectives and 
patchouli-scented participles" (to quote Holmes), laboring hard 
to create an exotic atmosphere by a wearisome profusion of 
lotus blossoms, sandalwood, spikenard, blown roses, diaphanous 
gauzes, etc. 

The second phase of Aldrich's art is more human in appeal 
as it is surer in artistry. He learned to sharpen his images, 
to fashion his smallest lyrics with a remarkable finesse. "In 
the little steel engravings that are the best expressions of his 
peculiar talent," writes Percy H. Boynton, " there is a fine 
simplicity; but it is the simplicity of an accomplished woman 
of the world rather than of a village maid." Although 
Aldrich bitterly resented the charge that he was a maker of 
tiny perfections, a carver of cherry-stones, these poems of his 
which have the best chance of permanence are some of the 
epigrams, the short lyrics and a few of the sonnets, passionless 
in tone but exquisite in design. 

The best of Aldrich's diffuse poetry has been collected in an 
inclusive Household Edition, published by Houghton, Mifflin 
and Company. He died in 1907. 



MEMORY 

My mind lets go a thousand things, 
Like dates of wars and deaths of kings, 
And yet recalls the very hour — 
'Twas noon by yonder village tower, 
8 



Thomas Bailey Aldrich 

And on the last blue noon in May — 
The wind came briskly up this way, 
Crisping the brook beside the road; 
Then, pausing here, set down its load 
Of pine-scents, and shook listlessly 
Two petals from that wild-rose tree. 

"ENAMORED ARCHITECT OF AIRY RHYME" 

Enamored architect of airy rhyme, 

Build as thou wilt, heed not what each man says. 

Good souls, but innocent of dreamers' ways, 

Will come, and marvel why thou wastest time; 

Others, beholding how thy turrets climb 

'Twixt theirs and heaven, will hate thee all thy days; 

But most beware of those who come to praise. 

O Wondersmith, O worker in sublime 

And heaven-sent dreams, let art be all in all; 

Build as thou wilt, unspoiled by praise or blame, 

Build as thou wilt, and as thy light is given; 

Then, if at last the airy structure fall, 

Dissolve, and vanish — take thyself no shame. 

They fail, and they alone, who have not striven. 

TWO QUATRAINS 

MAPLE LEAVES 

October turned my maple's leaves to gold; 
The most are gone now; here and there one lingers: 
Soon these will slip from out the twigs' weak hold, 
Like coins between a dying miser's fingers, 
9 



Thomas Bailey Aldrich 

PESSIMIST AND OPTIMIST 

This one sits shivering in Fortune's smile, 

Taking his joy with bated, doubtful breath. 
This other, gnawed by hunger, all the while 
Laughs in the teeth of Death. 



John Hay 

John Hay was born at Salem, Indiana, in 1838, graduated 
from Brown University in 1858 and was admitted to the Illinois 
bar a few years later. At nineteen, when he went back to 
Warsaw, the little Mississippi town where he had lived as a 
boy, he dreamed only of being a poet — a poet, it must be 
added, of the pleasantly conventional, transition type. But the 
Civil War was to disturb his mild fantasies. He became pri- 
vate secretary to Lincoln, then major and assistant adjutant- 
general under General Gilmore, then secretary of the Lega- 
tion at Paris, charge d'affaires at Vienna and secretary of 
legation at Madrid. 

His few vivid Pike County Ballads came more as a happy 
accident than as a deliberate creative effort. When Hay re- 
turned from Spain in 1870, bringing with him his Castilian 
Days, he still had visions of becoming an orthodox lyric poet. 
But he found everyone reading Bret Harte's short stories and 
the new expression of the rude West. (See Preface.) He specu- 
lated upon the possibility of doing something similar, translating 
the characters into poetry. The result was the six racy ballads 
in a vein utterly different from everything Hay wrote before or 
after. The poet-politician seems to have regarded this series 
somewhat in the nature of light, extempore verse, belonging to 
a far lower plane than his serious publications; he talked about 
them reluctantly, he even hoped that they would be forgotten. 
It is difficult to say whether this regret grew because Hay, 

10 



John Hay 

loving the refinements of culture, at heart hated any sugges- 
tion of vulgarity, or because of a basic lack of courage — Hay 
having published his novel of labor unrest in the early 8o's 
{The Breadwinners) anonymously. 

The fact remains, his rhymes of Pike County have survived 
all his more classical lines. They served for a time as a fresh 
influence, they remain a creative accomplishment. 

Hay vpas in politics all the later part of his life, ranking as 
one of the most brilliant Secretaries of State the country has 
ever had. He died in 1905. 



JIM BLUDSO, 

OF THE PRAIRIE BELLE 

Wall, no! I can't tell whar he lives, 

Becase he don't live, you see; 
Leastways, he's got out of the habit 

Of livin' like you and me. 
Whar have you been for the last three year 

That you haven't heard folks tell 
How Jimmy Bludso passed in his checks 

The night of the Prairie Belle? 

He war'n't no saint, — them engineers 

Is all pretty much alike, — 
One wife in Natchez-under-the-Hill 

And another one here, in Pike ; 
A keerless man in his talk was Jim, 

And an awkward hand in a row. 
But he never flunked, and he never lied, — 

I reckon he never knowed how. 
II 



John Hay 

And this was all the religion he had: 

To treat his engine well ; 
Never be passed on the river ; 

To mind the pilot's bell; 
And if ever the Prairie Belle took fire, 

A thousand times he swore, 
He'd hold her nozzle again the bank 

Till the last soul got ashore. 

All boats has their day on the Mississip, 

And her day come at last, — 
The Movastar was a better boat, 

But the Belle she wouldn't be passed. 
And so she came tearin' along that night — 

The oldest craft on the line — 
With a nigger squat on her safety-valve, 

And her furnace crammed, rosin and pine. 

The fire bust out as she clar'd the bar. 

And burnt a hole in the night. 
And quick as a flash she turned and made 

For that wilier-bank on the right. 
Thar was runnin' and cussin', but Jim yelled out. 

Over all the infernal roar, 
" I'll hold her nozzle again the bank 

Till the last galoot's ashore." 

Through the hot, black breath of the burnin' boat 

Jim Bludso's voice was heard. 
And they all had trust in his cussedness. 

And knowed he would keep his word. 
12 



John Hay 

And, sure's you're born, they all got off 
Afore the smokestacks fell, — 

And Bludso's ghost went up alone 
In the smoke of the Prairie Belle. 

He warn't no saint, — but at jedgement 

I'd run my chance with Jim, 
'Longside of some pious gentlemen 

That wouldn't shook hands with him. 
He seen his duty, a dead-sure thing, — 

And went for it thar and then ; 
And Christ ain't a goin' to be too hard 

On a man that died for men. 



BANTY TIM 

(Remarks of Sergeant Tilmon Joy to the White Man's 
Committee of Spunky Point, Illinois) 

I reckon I git your drift, gents, — 

You 'low the boy sha'n't stay; 
This is a white man's country; 

You're Dimocrats, you say; 
And whereas, and seein', and wherefore, 

The times bein' all out o' j'int. 
The nigger has got to mosey 

From the limits o' Spunky P'int! 

Le's reason the thing a minute: 
I'm an old-fashioned Dimocrat too. 

Though I laid my politics out o' the way 
For to keep till the war was through. 
13 



John Hay 

But I come back here, allowin' 

To vote as I used to do, 
Though it gravels me like the devil to train 

Along o' sich fools as you. 

Novv^ dog my cats ef I kin see. 

In all the light of the day, 
What you've got to do with the question 

Ef Tim shill go or stay. 
And furder than that I give notice, 

Ef one of you tetches the boy, 
He kin check his trunks to a warmer clime 

Than he'll find in Illanoy. 

Why, blame your hearts, jest hear me! 

You know that ungodly day 
When our left struck Vicksburg Heights, how ripped 

And torn and tattered we lay. 
When the rest retreated I stayed behind, 

Fur reasons sufficient to me, — 
With a rib caved in, and a leg on a strike, 

I sprawled on that damned glacee. 

Lord! how the hot sun went for us. 

And br'iled and blistered and burned! 
How the Rebel bullets whizzed round us 

When a cuss in his death-grip turned! 
Till along toward dusk I seen a thing 

I couldn't believe for a spell: 
That nigger — that Tim — was a crawlin' to me 

Through that fire-proof, gilt-edged hell! 
14 



John Hay 

The Rebels seen him as quick as me, 

And the bullets buzzed like bees; 
But he jumped for me, and shouldered me. 

Though a shot brought him once to his knees; 
But he staggered up, and packed me off, 

With a dozen stumbles and falls, 
Till safe in our lines he drapped us both. 

His black hide riddled with balls. 

So, my gentle gazelles, thar's my answer. 

And here stays Banty Tim: 
He trumped Death's ace for me that day, 

And I'm not goin' back on him! 
You may rezoloot till the cows come home, 

But ef one of you tetches the boy. 
He'll wrastle his hash to-night in hell. 

Or my name's not Tilmon Joy! 

Bret Harte 

(Francis) Bret Harte was born August 25, 1839, at Albany, 
New York. His childhood was spent in various cities of the 
East. Late in 1853 his widowed mother went to California 
with a party of relatives, and two months later, when he was 
fifteen, Bret Harte and his sister followed. He dreamed even 
at this age of being a poet. During the next few years he was 
engaged in school-teaching, typesetting, politics, mining and 
journalism, becoming editor of The Overland Monthly at San 
Francisco in 1868. 

Harte's fame came suddenly. Late in the sixties he had 
written a burlesque in rhyme of two Western gamblers trying 
to fleece a guileless Chinaman who claimed to know nothing 
about cards but who, it turned out, was scarcely as innocent 

15 



Bret Harie 

as he appeared. Harte, in the midat of writing serious poetry, 
had put the verses aside as too crude and trifling for publica- 
tion. Some time later, just as The O-verland Monthly was 
going to press, it was discovered that the form was one page 
shDrt. Having nothing else on hand, Harte had these rhymes 
set up. Instead of passing unnoticed, the poem was quoted 
everywhere ; it swept the West and captivated the East. When 
The Luck of Roaring Camp followed, Harte became not only 
a national but an international figure. England acclaimed him 
and The Atlantic Monthly paid him $10,000 to write for a year 
in his Pike County vein. 

East and West Poems appeared in 1871 ; in 1872 he published 
an enlarged Poetical Works including many earlier pieces. 
His scores of short stories represent Harte at his best; 
" M'liss," " Tennessee's Partner," " The Outcast of Poker 
Flat" — these are the work of a lesser, transplanted Dickens. 
His novels are of minor importance; they are carelessly con- 
structed, theatrically conceived; his characters are little more 
than badly-wired marionettes that betray every movement made 
by their manipulator. 

In 1872 Harte, encouraged by his success, returned to his 
native East; in 1878 he went to Germany as consul. Two years 
later he was transferred to Scotland and, after five years there, 
went to London, where he remained the rest of his life. 
Harte's later period remains mysteriously shrouded. He never 
came back to America, not even for a visit; he ceased to cor- 
respond with his family; he separated himself from all the 
most intimate associations of his early life. He died, suddenly, 
at Camberley, England, May 6, 1902. 



" JIM " 

Say there! P'r'aps 
Some on you chaps 

Might know Jim Wild? 
16 



Bret Harte 

Well, — no offense: 
•Thar ain't no sense 

In gittin' riled ! 
Jim was my chum 

Up on the Bar: 
That's why I come 

Down from up yar, 
Lookin' for Jim. 
Thank ye, sir ! You 
Ain't of that crew, — 

Blest if you are! 
Money? Not much: 

That ain't my kindj 
I ain't no such. 

Rum? I don't mind, 
Seein' it's you. 

Well, this yer Jim, — 
Did you know him? 
Jes' 'bout your size; 
Same kind of eyes; — 
Well, that is strange: 
Why, it's two year 
Since he came here. 
Sick, for a change. 
Well, here's to us: 
Eh? 

The h you say! 

Dead? 
That little cuss? 
17 



Bret Harte 

What makes you star', 
You over thar? 
Can't a man drop 
's glass in yer shop 
But you must r'ar? 

It wouldn't take 

D d much to break 

You and your bar. 

Dead! 
Poor — little — ^Jim ! 
Why, thar was me, 
Jones, and Bob Lee, 
Harry and Ben, — 
No-account men: 
Then to take him! 

Well, thar — Good-by. 
No more, sir — I — 

Eh? 
What's that you say? 
Why, dern it! — sho! — 
No? Yes! By Joe! 

Sold! 
Sold! Why, you limb, 
You ornery, 

Derned, old, 
Long-legged Jim. 



18 



Bret Harte 
PLAIN LANGUAGE FROM TRUTHFUL JAMES 

(Table Mountain, 1870) 

Which I wish to remark, 

And my language is plain, 
That for ways that are dark 

And for tricks that are vain. 
The heathen Chinee is peculiar, 

Which the same I would rise to explain. 

Ah Sin was his name; 

And I shall not deny, 
In regard to the same. 

What that name might imply; 
But his smile it was pensive and childlike. 

As I frequent remarked to Bill Nye. 

It was August the third, 

And quite soft was the skies; 
Which it might be inferred 

That Ah Sin was likewise; 
Yet he played it that day upon William 

And me in a way I despise. 

Which we had a small game. 

And Ah Sin took a hand: 
It was Euchre. The same 

He did not understand ; 
But he smiled as he sat by the table, 

With a smile that was childlike and bland. 
19 



Bret Harte 

Yet the cards they were stocked 

In a way that I grieve, 
And my feelings were shocked 

At the state of Nye's sleeve, 
Which was stuffed full of aces and bowers, 

And the same with intent to deceive. 

But the hands that were played 

By that heathen Chinee, 
And the points that he made, 

Were quite frightful to see, — 
Till at last he put down a right bower, 

Which the same Nye had dealt unto me! 

Then I looked up at Nye, 

And he gazed upon me; 
And he rose with a sigh. 

And said, "Can this be? 
We are ruined by Chinese cheap labor,"— 

And he went for that heathen Chinee. 

In the scene that ensued 

I did not take a hand. 
But the floor it was strewed 

Like the leaves on the strand 
With the cards that Ah Sin had been hiding, 

In the game " he did not understand." 

In his sleeves, which were long, 

He had twenty-four packs, — 
Which was coming it strong. 

Yet I state but the facts; 
20 



Bret Harte 

And we found on his nails, which were taper, 
What is frequent in tapers, — that's wax. 

Which is why I remark, 

And my language is plain. 
That for ways that are dark 

And for tricks that are vain. 
The heathen Chinee is peculiar, — 

Which the same I am free to maintain. 



Joaquin Miller 

Cincinnatus (Heine) Miller, or, to give him the name he 
adopted, Joaquin Miller, was born in 1841 of immigrant 
parents. As he himself writes, " My cradle was a covered 
wagon, pointed west. I was born in a covered wagon, I am 
told, at or about the time it crossed the line dividing Indiana 
from Ohio.'' When Miller was twelve, his family left the mid- 
West with " two big heavily laden wagons, with eight yoke of 
oxen to each, a carriage and two horses for mother and baby 
sister, and a single horse for the three boys to ride." The 
distance covered in their cross-country exodus (they took a 
roundabout route to Oregon) was nearly three thousand miles. 
The time consumed, he records, " was seven months and five 
days. There were no bridges, no railroad levels, nothing of the 
sort. . . . Many times, at night, after ascending a stream to 
find a ford, we could look back and see our smouldering camp- 
fires of the day before.'' This journey made a lasting'impression 
on the boy's impressionable mind ; it was this tortuous wander- 
ing that gave Miller his reverence for the spaciousness and 
glory of the West in general and the pioneer in particular. 
After two years in the Oregon home, he ran away to find gold. 

21 



Joaquin Miller 

At fifteen we find Miller living with the Indians as one of 
them; in 1859 (^t the age of eighteen) he attends a mission- 
school "college" in Eugene, Oregon; between i860 and 1865 
he is express-messenger, editor of a pacifist newspaper that is 
suppressed for opposing the Civil War, lawyer and, occasion- 
ally, a poet. He holds a minor judgeship from 1866 to 1870. 

His first book (Specimens) appears in 1868, his second 
(Joaquin et al., from which he took his name) in 1869. No 
response — not even from "the bards of San Francisco Bay'' to 
whom he had dedicated the latter volume. He is chagrined, 
discouraged, angry. He resolves to quit America, to go to the 
land that has always been the nursing-ground of poets. "Three 
months later, September i, 1870, I was kneeling at the grave of 
Burns. I really expected to die there in the land of ray fathers." 
He arrives in London, unheralded, unknown. He takes his manu- 
scripts to one publisher after another with the same negative 
result. Finally, with a pioneer desperation, he prints privately 
one hundred copies of his Pacific Poems, sending them out for 
review. Sensation ! The reversal of Miller's fortunes is one 
of the most startling in all literature. He becomes famous over- 
night. He is feted, lauded, lionized; he is ranked as an equal 
of Browning, given a dinner by the Pre-Raphaelites, acclaimed 
as " the great interpreter of America," " the Bryon of 
Oregon " ! 

His dramatic success in England is easily explained. He 
brought to the calm air of literary London, a breath of the 
great winds of the plain. The more he exaggerated his 
crashing effects, the louder he roared, the better the English 
public liked it. When he entered Victorian parlors in his 
velvet jacket, hip-boots and flowing hair, childhood visions of 
the " wild and woolly Westerner " were realized and the very 
bombast of his work was glorified as " typically American.'' 

And yet, for all his overstressed muscularity, Miller is 
strangely lacking in creative energy. His exuberance and 
whipped-up rhetoric cannot disguise the essential weakness of 
his verse. It is, in spite of a certain breeziness and a few 

22 



Joaquin Miller 

magnificent descriptions of canons and mountain-chains, feeble 
as well as false, full of cheap heroics, atrocious taste and 
impossible men and women. (See Preface.) One or two indi- 
vidual poems, like "Crossing the Plains" and parts of his 
apostrophes to the Sierras, the Pacific Ocean and the Missouri 
river may live; the rest seem doomed to a gradual extinction. 

From 1872 to 1886, Miller traveled about the Continent. 
In 1887 he returned to California, dwelling on the Heights, 
helping to found an experimental Greek academy for aspiring 
writers. He died there, after a determinedly picturesque life, 
in sight of the Golden Gate, in 1913. 



BY THE PACIFIC OCEAN ^ 

Here room and kingly silence keep 
Companionship in state austere ; 
The dignity of death is here, 
The large, lone vastness of the deep. 
Here toil has pitched his camp to rest: 
The west is banked against the west. 

Above yon gleaming skies of gold 
One lone imperial peak is seen ; 
While gathered at his feet in green 
Ten thousand foresters are told. 
And all so still! so still the air 
That duty drops the web of care. 

^ Permission to reprint this poem was granted by the Harr 
Wagner Publishing Co., San Francisco, California, publishers 
of Joaquin Miller's Complete Poetical Works. 

23 



Joaquin Miller 

Beneath the sunset's golden sheaves 
The awful deep walks with the deep, 
Where silent sea-doves slip and sweep, 
And commerce keeps her loom and weaves. 
The dead red men refuse to rest; 
Their ghosts illume my lurid West. 



CROSSING THE PLAINS ^ 

What great yoked brutes with briskets low. 
With wrinkled necks like buffalo, 
With round, brown, liquid, pleading eyes. 
That turn'd so slow and sad to you, 
That shone like love's eyes soft with tears. 
That seem'd to plead, and make replies, 
The while they bow'd their necks and drew 
The creaking load; and looked at you. 
Their sable briskets swept the ground. 
Their cloven feet kept solemn sound. 

Two sullen bullocks led the line. 
Their great eyes shining bright like wine; 
Two sullen captive kings were they. 
That had in time held herds at bay, 
And even now they crush'd the sod 

^ Permission to reprint this poem was granted by the Harr 
Wagner Publishing Co., San Francisco, California, publishers 
of Joaquin Miller's Complete Poetical Works. 

24 



Joaquin Miller 

With stolid sense of majesty, 
And stately stepp'd and stately trod, 
As if 'twere something still to be 
Kings even in captivity. 

FROM "BYRON" 

In men whom men condemn as ill 
I find so much of goodness still, 
In men whom men pronounce divine 
I find so much of sin and blot, 
I do not dare to draw a line 
Between the two, where God has not. 

Edward Rowland Sill 

Edward Rowland Sill was born at Windsor, Connecticut, in 
1841. In 1861 he was graduated from Yale and shortly there- 
after his poor health compelled him West. After various un- 
successful experiments, he drifted into teaching, first in the high 
schools in Ohio, later in the English department of the Uni- 
versity of California. His uncertain physical condition added 
to his mental uncertainty. Unable to ally himself either with 
the lethargic, conservative forces whom he hated or with the 
radicals whom he distrusted, Sill became an uncomfortable 
solitary; half rebellious, half resigned. During the last decade 
of his life, his brooding seriousness was less pronounced, a 
lighter irony took the place of his dark reflections. 

Tfie Hermitage, his first volume, was published in 1867, a 
later edition (including later poems) appearing in 1889. His 
two posthumous books are Poems (1887) and Hermione and 
Other Poems (1899). 

Sill died, after bringing something of the Eastern culture to 
the West, in 1887. 

25 



Edward Ronvland Sill 

SOLITUDE 

All alone — alone, 

Calm, as on a kingly throne, 

Take thy place in the crowded land. 

Self-centred in free self-command. 

Let thy manhood leave behind 

The narrow ways of the lesser mind: 

What to thee are its little cares, 

The feeble love or the spite it bears? 

Let the noisy crowd go by: 

In thy lonely watch on high, 

Far from the chattering tongues of men. 

Sitting above their call or ken. 

Free from links of manner and form 

Thou shalt learn of the winged storm — 

God shall speak to thee out of the sky. 

DARE YOU? 

Doubting Thomas and loving John, 
Behind the others walking on: — 

" Tell me now, John, dare you be 
One of the minority? 
To be lonely in your thought, 
Never visited nor sought, 
Shunned with secret shrug, to go 
Thro' the world, esteemed its foe; 
26 



Edward Rowland Sill 

To be singled out and hissed, 
Pointed at as one unblessed, 
Warned against in whispers faint, 
Lest the children catch a taint; 
To bear off your titles well, — 
Heretic and infidel? 
If you dare, come now with me. 
Fearless, confident, and free." 

" Thomas, do you dare to be 

Of the great majority? 

To be only, as the rest. 

With Heaven's creature comforts blessed; 

To accept, in humble part. 

Truth that shines on every heart; 

Never to be set on high. 

Where the envious curses fly ; 

Never name or fame to find. 

Still outstripped in soul and mind; 

To be hid, unless to God, 

As one grass-blade in the sod. 

Underfoot with millions trod? 

If you dare, come with us, be 

Lost in love's great unity. 



Sidney Lanier 

Sidney Lanier was born at Macon, Georgia, February 3, 1842. 
His was a family of musicians (Lanier himself was a skilful 
performer on various instruments), and it is not surprising that 

27 



Sidney Lanier 

his verse emphasizes — even overstresses — the influence of music 
on poetry. He attended Oglethorpe College, graduating at the 
age of eighteen (i860), and, a year later, volunteered as a 
private in the Confederate army. After several months' im- 
prisonment (he had been captured while acting as signal officer 
on a blockade-runner), Lanier was released in February, 1865, 
returning from Point Lookout to Georgia on foot, accompanied 
only by his flute, from which he refused to be separated. His 
physical health, never the most robust, had been frightfully 
impaired by his incarceration, and he was already suflrering 
from tuberculosis, the rest of his life being spent in an unequal 
struggle against it. 

He was now only twenty-three years old and the problem of 
choosing a vocation was complicated by his marriage in 1867. 
He spent five years in the study and practice of law, during 
which time he wrote comparatively little verse. But the law 
could not hold him; he felt premonitions of death and realized 
he must devote his talents to art before it was too late. He 
was fortunate enough to obtain a position as flautist with the 
Peabody Symphony Orchestra in 1873 in Baltimore, where he 
had free access to the music and literature he craved. Here 
he wrote all of his best poetry. In 1879, he was made lecturer 
on English in Johns Hopkins University, and it was for his 
courses there that he wrote his chief prose work, a brilliant if 
not conclusive study. The Science of English Verse. Besides 
his poetry, he wrote several books for boys, the two most popu- 
lar being The Boy's Froissart (1878) and The Boy's King 
Arthur (1880). 

Lanier's poetry, charming though most of it is, suffers from 
his all too frequent theorizing, his too-conscious effort to bring 
verse over into the province of pure music. He thought almost 
entirely, even in his most intellectual conceptions, in terms of 
musical form. His main theory that English verse has for its 
essential basis not accent but a strict musical quantity is a 
wholly erroneous conclusion, possible only to one who could 
write " whatever turn I have for art is purely musical — poetry 



Sidney Lanier 

being with me a mere tangent into which I shoot." Lanier is 
at his best in his ballads, although a few of his lyrics have a 
similar spontaneity. In spite of the fact that he had rather 
novel schemes of rhythm and stanza-structure, much of his work 
is marred by strained effects, elaborate conceits and a kind of 
verse that approaches mere pattern-making. But such a vigor- 
ous ballad as " The Song of the Chattahoochee," lyrics like 
" Night and Day " and " The Stirrup Cup," and parts of the 
symphonic " Hymns of the Marshes " are sure of a place in 
American literature. Never a great figure, he was one of the 
most interesting and spiritual of our minor poets. 

Lanier died, a victim of his disease, in the mountains of 
North Carolina, September 7, 1881. 

SONG OF THE CHATTAHOOCHEE ^ 

Out of the hills of Habersham, 

Down the valleys of Hall, 
I hurry amain to reach the plain. 
Run the rapid and leap the fall, 
Split at the rock and together again, 
Accept my bed, or narrow or wide, 
And flee from folly on every side 
With a lover's pain to attain the plain 

Far from the hills of Habersham, 

Far from the valleys of Hall. 

All down the hills of Habersham, 
All through the valleys of Hall, 
The rushes cried Abide, abide, 
The willful waterweeds held me thrall, 
iFrom Poems of Sidney Lanier. Copyright, 1884, 1891, 1916, 
by Mary D. Lanier; published by Charles Scribner's Sons. By 
permission of the publishers. 

29 



Sidney Lanier 

The laving laurel turned my tide, 
The ferns and the fondling grass said Stay, 
The dewberry dipped for to work delay, 
And the little reeds sighed Abide, abide. 

Here in the hills of Habersham, 

Here in the valleys of Hall. 



High o'er the hills of Habersham, 

Veiling the valleys of Hall, 
The hickory told me manifold 
Fair tales of shade, the poplar tall 
Wrought me her shadowy self to hold. 
The chestnut, the oak, the walnut, the pine, 
Overleaning, with flickering meaning and sign. 
Said, Pass not, so cold, these manifold 

Deep shades of the hills of Habersham, 

These glades in the valleys of Hall. 



And oft in the hills of Habersham, 

And oft in the valleys of Hall, 
The white quartz shone, and the smooth brook-stone 
Did bar me of passage with friendly brawl, 
And many a luminous jewel lone 
— Crystals clear or acloud with mist, 
Ruby, garnet and amethyst — 
Made lures with the lights of streaming stone 

In the clefts of the hills of Habersham, 

In the beds of the valleys of Hall. 
30 



Sidney Lanier 

But oh, not the hills of Habersham, 

And oh, not the valleys of Hall 
Avail: I am fain for to water the plain. 
Downward the voices of Duty call — 
Downward, to toil and be mixed with the main. 
The dry fields burn, and the mills are to turn, 
And a myriad flowers mortally yearn. 
And the lordly main from beyond the plain 

Calls o'er the hills of Habersham, 

Calls through the valleys of Hall. 



NIGHT AND DAY ^ 

The innocent, sweet Day is dead. 
Dark Night hath slain her in her bed. 
O, Moors are as fierce to kill as to wed ! 
— Put out the light, said he. 

A sweeter light than ever rayed 
From star of heaven or eye of maid 
Has vanished in the unknown Shade 
— She's dead, she's dead, said he. 

Now, in a wild, sad after-mood 
The tawny Night sits still to brood 
Upon the dawn-time when he wooed 
— I would she lived, said he. 

^ From Poems of Sidney Lanier. Copyright, 1884, 1891, 1916, 
by Mary D. Lanier; published by Charles Scribner's Sons. By 
permission of the publishers. 

31 



Sidney Lanier 

Star-memories of happier times, 
Of loving deeds and lovers' rhymes, 
Throng forth in silvery pantomimes. 
— Come back, O Day! said he. 



FROM " THE MARSHES OF GLYNN " ^ 

As the marsh-hen secretly builds on the watery sod. 
Behold I will build me a nest on the greatness of God: 
I will fly in the greatness of God as the marsh-hen flies 
In the freedom that fills all the space 'twixt the marsh 

and the skies: 
By so many roots as the marsh-grass sends in the sod 
I will heartily lay me a-hold on the greatness of God : 
Oh, like to the greatness of God is the greatness within 
The range of the marshes, the liberal marshes of Glynn. 

And the sea lends large, as the marsh : lo, out of his plenty 

the sea 
Pours fast: full soon the time of the flood-tide must be: 
Look how the grace of the. sea doth go 
About and about through the intricate channels that flow 
Here and there. 

Everywhere, 
Till his waters have flooded the uttermost creeks and the 

low-lying lanes, 
And the marsh is meshed with a million veins, 

^ From Poems of Sidney Lanier. Copyright, 1884, 1891, 1916, 
by Mary D. Lanier; published by Charles Scribner's Sons. By 
permission of the publishers. 

32 



Sidney 



j-janter 



That like as with rosy and silvery essences flow 
In the rose-and-silver evening glow. 

Farewell, my lord Sun! 
The creeks overflow: a thousand rivulets run 
'Twixt the roots of the sod; the blades of the marsh- 
grass stir; 
Passeth a hurrying sound of wings that westward whirr; 
Passeth, and all is still; and the currents cease to run; 
And the sea and the marsh are one. 

How still the plains of the waters be! 
The tide in his ecstasy. 
The tide is at his highest height: 
And it is night. 

And now from the Vast of the Lord will the waters of 

sleep 
Roll in on the souls of men, 
But who will reveal to our waking ken 
The forms that swim and the shapes that creep 

Under the waters of sleep? 
And I would I could know what swimmeth below whtn 

the tide comes in 
On the length and breadth of the marvellous marshes 

of Glynn. 

Charles Edward Carryl 

Charles Edward Carryl, father of Guy Wetmore Carryl ^see 
page 142), was born in New York City, December 30, 1842. He 
was an officer and director in various railroads but found 

33 



Charles Edward Carryl 

leisure to write two of the few worthy rivals of the immortal 
Alice in Wonderland. These two, Davy and the Goblin (1884), 
which has gone through twenty printings, and The Admiral's 
Caravan (1891), contain many lively and diverting ballads as 
well as inspired nonsense verses in the manner of his model 
who, in spite of the slight difference in spelling, was also a 
Carroll. 

C. E. Carryl lived the greater part of his life in New York, 
but on retiring from business, removed to Boston and lived there 
until his death, which occurred in the summer of 1920. 



THE PLAINT OF THE CAMEL 

" Canary-birds feed on sugar and seed, 

Parrots have crackers to crunch ; 
And as for the poodles, they tell me the noodles 
Have chickens and cream for their lunch. 
But there's never a question 
About MY digestion — 
Anything does for me! 

" Cats, you're aware, can repose in a chair. 

Chickens can roost upon rails; 
Puppies are able to sleep in a stable. 
And oysters can slumber in pails. 
But no one supposes 
A poor Camel dozes — 
Any place does for me! 

" Lambs are enclosed where it's never exposed, 
Coops are constructed for hens; 
34 



Charles Edward Carryl 

Kittens are treated to houses well heated, 
And pigs are protected by pens. 
But a Camel comes handy 
Wherever it's sandy — 
Anywhere does for me! 

" People would laugh if you rode a giraffe, 

Or mounted the back of an ox; 
It's nobody's habit to ride on a rabbit. 
Or try to bestraddle a fox. 
But as for a Camel, he's 
Ridden by families — 
Any load does for me! 

" A snake is as round as a hole in the ground ; 

Weasels are wavy and sleek; 
And no alligator could ever be straighter 
Than lizards that live in a creek. 
But a Camel's all lumpy 
And bumpy and humpy — 
Any shape does for me! " 



ROBINSON CRUSOE'S STORY 

The night was thick and hazy 

When the " Piccadilly Daisy " 
Carried down the crew and captain in the sea; 

And I think the water drowned 'em; 

For they never, never found 'em 
And I know they didn't come ashore with me. 
35 



Charles Edward Carryl 

Oh ! 'twas very sad and lonely 

When I found myself the only 
Population on this cultivated shore; 

But I've made a little tavern 

In a rocky little cavern, 
And I sit and watch for people at the door. 



I spent no time in looking 
For a girl to do my cooking, 

As I'm quite a clever hand at making stews; 
But I had that fellow Friday, 
Just to keep the tavern tidy, 

And to put a Sunday polish on my shoes. 



I have a little garden 

That I'm cultivating lard in. 

As the things I eat are rather tough and dry; 
For I live on toasted lizards. 
Prickly pears, and parrot gizzards. 

And I'm really very fond of beetle-pie. 



The clothes I had were furry. 

And it made me fret and worry 
When I found the moths were eating off the hair ; 

And I had to scrape and sand 'em. 

And I boiled 'em and I tanned 'em. 
Till I got the fine morocco suit I wear. 
36 



Charles Edward Carryl 

I sometimes seek diversion 

In a family excursion 
With the few domestic animals you see; 

And we take along a carrot 

As refreshment for the parrot, 
And a little can of jungleberry tea. 



Then we gather as we travel, 
Bits of moss and dirty gravel, 

And we chip off little specimens of stone; 
And we carry home as prizes 
Funny bugs, of handy sizes, 

Just to give the day a scientific tone. 



If the roads are wet and muddy 

We remain at home and study, — 
For the Goat is very clever at a sum, — 

And the Dog, instead of fighting. 

Studies ornamental writing. 
While the Cat is taking lessons on the drum. 



We retire at eleven. 

And we rise again at seven; 

And I wish to call attention, as I close. 
To the fact that all the scholars 
Are correct about their collars, 

And particular in turning out their toes. 
37 



James Whitcomb Riley 

James Whitcomb Riley, who was possibly the most widely 
read native poet of his day, was born October 7, 1849, in 
Greenfield, Indiana, a small town twenty miles from Indian- 
apolis, where he spent his later years. Contrary to the popular 
belief, Riley was not, as many have gathered from his bucolic 
dialect poems, a struggling child of the soil ; his father was a 
lawyer in comfortable circumstances and Riley was not only 
given a good education but was prepared for the law. His 
temperament, however, craved something more adventurous. 
At eighteen he shut the heavy pages of Blackstone, slipped out 
of the office and joined a traveling troupe of actors who sold 
patent medicines during the intermissions. Riley's functions 
were varied: he beat the bass-drum, painted their flaring ban- 
ners, wrote local versions of old songs, coached the actors and, 
when occasion arose, took part in the performance himself. 

Even before this time, Riley had begun to send verses to the 
newspapers, frank experiments, bits of homely sentiment, simple 
snatches and elaborate hoaxes — the poem " Leonainie," published 
over the initials " E. A. P.," being accepted in many quarters 
as a newly discovered poem by Poe. In 1882, when he was on 
the staff of the Indianapolis Journal, he began the series of 
dialect poems which he claimed were by a rude and unlettered 
farmer, one " Benj. F. Johnson, of Boone, the Hoosier poet" — 
printing long extracts from " Boone's " ungrammatical and 
badly-spelt letters to prove his find. A collection of these 
rustic verses appeared, in 1883, as The Ole Swimmin' Hole; and 
Riley leaped into widespread popularity. 

Other collections followed rapidly: Afteriahiles (1887), Old- 
Fashioned Roses (1888), Pipes 0' Pan at Zekeshury (1889), 
Rhymes of Childhood (1890). All met an instant response; 
Riley endeared himself, by his homely idiom and his childlike 
ingenuity, to a countryful of readers, adolescent and adult. 

But Riley's simplicity is not always as artless as it seems. 
Time and again, one can see him trading wantonly on the emo- 
tions of his unsophisticated readers; he sees them about to 
smile — and broadens the point of his joke ; he observes them on 

38 



James White omb Riley 

the point of tears — and pulls out the sobbing tremolo stop. 
In many respects, he is patently the most artificial of those poets 
who claim to give us the stuff of the soil. He is the poet of 
obtrusive sentiment rather than of quiet convictions; of lulling 
assurance, of philosophies that never disturb his readers, of 
sweet truisms rather than searching truths. 

That work of his which may endure, will survive because of 
the personal flavor that Riley often fused into it. Such 
poems as " When the Frost is on the Punkin'," " The Raggedy 
Man," "Our Hired Girl" are a part of American folk litera- 
ture; "Little Orphant Annie" is read wherever there is a 
schoolhouse or, for that matter, a nursery. In 1912 the schools 
throughout the country observed his birthday. 

Riley died in his little house in Lockerbie Street, Indianapolis, 
July 22, 1916. 



" WHEN THE FROST IS ON THE PUNKIN " ^ 

When the frost is on the punkin and the fodder's in the 

shock, 
And you hear the kyouck and gobble of the struttin' 

turkey-cock. 
And the clackin' of the guineys, and the cluckin' of the 

hens. 
And the rooster's hallylooyer as he tiptoes on the fence; 
O, it's then the time a feller is a-feelin' at his best. 
With the risin' sun to greet him from a night of peaceful 

rest, 

1 From the Biographical Edition of the Complete Works of 
James Whitcomb Riley. Copyright, 1913. Used by special per- 
mission of the publishers, The Bobbs-Merrill Company. 

39 



James Whitcomb Riley 

As he leaves the house, bareheaded, and goes out to feed 

the stock, 
When the frost is on the punkin and the fodder's in the 

shock. 

They's something kindo' harty-like about the atmusfere 
When the heat of summer's over and the coolin' fall is 

here — 
Of course we miss the flowers-, and the blossoms on the 

trees, 
And the mumble of the hummin'-birds and buzzin' of 

the bees; 
But the air's so appetizin' ; and the landscape through the 

haze 
Of a crisp and sunny morning of the airly autumn days 
Is a pictur' that no painter has the colorin' to mock — 
When the frost is on the punkin and the fodder's in the 

shock. 

The husky, rusty russel of the tossels of the corn. 
And the raspin' of the tangled leaves as golden as the 

morn ; 
The stubble in the furries — kindo' lonesome-like, but still 
A-preachin' sermuns to us of the barns they growed to fill ; 
The strawstack in the medder, and the reaper in the shed ; 
The bosses in theyr stalls below — the clover overhead ! — 
O, it sets my hart a-clickin' like the tickin' of a clock. 
When the frost is on the punkin and the fodder's in the 

shock. 

40 



James Whitcomb Riley 

Then your apples all is gethered, and the ones a feller 

keeps 
Is poured around the cellar-floor in red and yaller heaps; 
And your cider-makin's over, and your wimmern-folks 

is through 
With theyr mince and apple-butter, and theyr souse and 

sausage too! . . . 
I don't know how to tell it — but ef such a thing could be 
As the angels wantin' boardin', and they'd call around 

on me — 
I'd want to 'commodate 'em — all the whole-indurin' 

flock- 
When the frost is on the punkin and the fodder's in the 

shock. 



A PARTING GUEST ^ 

What delightful hosts are they — 

Life and Love! 
Lingeringly I turn away, 

This late hour, yet glad enough 
They have not withheld from me 

Their high hospitality. 
So, with face lit with delight 

And all gratitude, I stay 

Yet to press their hands and say, 
" Thanks. — So fine a time ! Good night." 

1 From the Biographical Edition of the Complete Works of 
James Whitcomb Riley. Copyright, 1913. Used by special per- 
mission of the publishers, The Bobbs-Merrill Company. 

41 



Eugene Field 

Although born (September 3, 1850) in St. Louis, Missouri, 
Eugene Field belongs to the literature of the far West. Colo- 
rado and the Rocky Mountain region claimed him as their own 
and Field never repudiated the allegiance; he even called most 
of his poetry " Western Verse." 

Field's area of education embraced Nevp England, Missouri, 
and what European territory he could cover in six months. 
At twenty-three he became a reporter on the St. Louis Evening 
Journal, the rest of his life being given, with a dogged devotion, 
to journalism. Driven by the demands of his unique daily 
columns (those on the Denver Tribune [1881-1883] and the 
Chicago Daily News [1883-1895] were widely copied). Field 
first capitalized and then standardized his high spirits, his 
erudition, his whimsicality, his fondness for children. He 
wrote so often with his tongue in his cheek that it is difficult 
to say where true sentiment stops and an exaggerated senti- 
mentality begins. " Field," says Fred Lewis Pattee, in his de- 
tailed study of American Literature Since 1870, " more than 
any other writer of the period, illustrates the way the old type 
of literary scholar was to be modified and changed by the news- 
paper. Every scrap of Field's voluminous product was written 
for immediate newspaper consumption. He patronized not at 
all the literary magazines, he wrote his books not at all with 
book intent — he made them up from newspaper fragments. 
. . . He was a pioneer in a peculiar province: he stands for 
the journalization of literature, a process that, if carried to its 
logical extreme, will make of the man of letters a mere news- 
paper reporter." 

Though Field still may be overrated in some quarters, there 
is little doubt that certain of his child lyrics, his homely phi- 
losophic ballads (in the vein which Harte and Riley popu- 
larized) and his brilliant burlesques will occupy a niche in 
American letters. Readers of all tastes will find much to 
surprise and delight them in A Little Book of tVestern Verse 
(1889), With Trumpet and Drum (1892), A Second Book of 
Verse (1893) ^nd those remarkable versions (and perversions) 

42 



Eugene Field 

of Horace, Echoes from the Sabine Farm {1893) wrkten in col- 
laboration with his equally adroit brother, Roswell M. Field. 
A complete one-volume edition of his verse was issued in 1910. 
Field died in Chicago, Illinois, November 4, 1895. 



OUR TWO OPINIONS^ 

Us two wuz boys when we fell out, — 

Nigh to the age uv my youngest now; 
Don't rec'lect what 'twuz about, 

Some small deeflt'rence, I'll allow. 
Lived next neighbors twenty years, 

A-hatin' each other, me 'nd Jim, — 
He having his opinyin uv me, 

'Nd / havin' my opinyin uv him. 

Grew up together 'nd wouldn't speak. 

Courted sisters, 'nd marr'd 'em, too ; 
'Tended same meetin'-house oncet a week, 

A-hatin' each other through 'nd through ! 
But when Abe Linkern asked the West 

F'r soldiers, we answered, — me 'nd Jim, — 
He bavin' his opinyin uv me, 

'Nd / bavin' my opinyin uv him. 

But down in Tennessee one night 
Ther' wuz sound uv firin' fur away, 

'Nd the sergeant allowed ther'd be a fight 
With the Johnnie Rebs some time nex' day ; 

1 Reprinted from The Complete Works of Eugene Field by 
permission of Charles Scribner's Sons, holders of the copyright. 

43 



Eugene Field 

'Nd as I wuz thinkin' uv Lizzie 'nd home 
Jim stood afore me, long 'nd slim, — 

He havin' his opinyin uv me, 

'Nd / havin' m]i opinyin uv him. 

Seemed like we knew there wuz goin' to be 

Serious trouble f r me 'nd him ; 
Us two shuck hands, did Jim 'nd me, 

But never a word from me or Jim! 
He went his way 'nd / went mine, 

'Nd into the battle's roar went we, — 
/ havin' my opinyin of Jim, 

'Nd he havin' his opinyin uv me. 

Jim never came back from the war again, 

But I hain't forgot that last, last night 
When, waitin' f'r orders, us two men 

Made up 'nd shuck hands, afore the fight. 
'Nd after it all, it's soothin' to knov/ 

That here I be 'nd younder's Jim, — 
He havin' his opinyin uv me, 

'Nd / havin' my opinyin uv him. 

LITTLE BOY BLUE ^ 

The little toy dog is covered with dust. 
But sturdy and staunch he stands ; 

The little toy soldier is red with rust, 

And his musket moulds in his hands. 

'^ Reprinted from The Complete JVoris of Eugene Field by 
permission of Charles Scribner's Sons, holders of the copyright. 

44 



Eugene Field 

Time was when the little toy dog was new, 
And the soldier was passing fair; 

And that was the time when our Little Boy Blue 
Kissed them and put them there. 

" Now don't you go till I come," he said. 

And don't you make any noise! " 
So, toddling off to his trundle bed, 

He dreamt of the pretty toys; 
And, as he was dreaming, an angel song 

Awakened our Little Boy Blue — 
Oh! the years are many, the years are long. 

But the little toy friends are true! 

Ay, faithful to Little Boy Blue they stand, 

Each in the same old place, 
Awaiting the touch of a little hand, 

The smile of a little face; 
And they wonder, as waiting the long years through 

In the dust of that little chair. 
What has become of our Little Boy Blue, 

Since he kissed them and put them there. 



SEEIN' THINGS ^ 

I ain't afraid uv snakes or toads, or bugs or worms or 

mice. 
An' things 'at girls are skeered uv I think are awful nice ! 

1 Reprinted from The Complete Works of Eugene Field by 
permission of Charles Scribner's Sons, holders of the copyright. 

45 



Eugene Field 

I'm pretty brave I guess; an' yet I hate to go to bed, 
For, when I'm tucked up warm an' snug an' when my 

prayers are said. 
Mother tells me " Happy Dreams " an' takes away the 

light, 
An' leaves me lyin' all alone an' seein' things at night! 

Sometimes they're in the corner, sometimes they're by the 

door. 
Sometimes they're all a-standin' in the middle uv the floor; 
Sometimes they are a-sittin' down, sometimes they're 

walkin' round 
So softly and so creepy-like they never make a sound! 
Sometimes they are as black as ink, an' other times 

they're white — 
But color ain't no difference when you see things at night! 

Once, when I licked a feller 'at had just moved on our 

street, 
An' father sent me up to bed without a bite to eat, 
I woke up in the dark an' saw things standin' in a row, 
A-lookin' at me cross-eyed an' p'intin' at me — so! 
Oh, my! I wuz so skeered 'at time I never slep' a mite — 
It's almost alluz when I'm bad I see things at night! 

Lucky thing I ain't a girl or I'd be skeered to death! 
Bein' I'm a boy, I duck my head an' hold my breath. 
An' I am, oh so sony I'm a naughty boy, an' then 
I promise to be better an' I say my prayers again! 
Gran 'ma tells me that's the only way to make it right 
When a feller has been wicked an' sees things at night! 

46 



Eugene Field 

An' so when other naughty boys would coax me into sin, 
I try to slcwush the Tempter's voice 'at urges me within ; 
An' when they's pie for supper, or cakes 'at's big an' nice, 
I want to — but I do not pass my plate f'r them things 

twice ! 
No, ruther let Starvation wipe me slowly out o' sight 
Than I should keep a-livin' on an' seein' things at night! 

Edwin Markham 

Edwin Markham was born in Oregon City, Oregon, April 23, 
1852, the youngest son of pioneer parents. His father died 
before he had reached his fifth year and in 1857 he was taken 
by his mother to a wild valley in the Suisun Hills in central 
California. Here he grew to young manhood ; farming, 
broncho-riding, laboring on a cattle ranch, educating himself in 
the primitive country schools and supplementing his studies 
with whatever books he could procure. At eighteen he deter- 
mined to be a teacher and entered the State Normal School at 
San Jose. After some years he became superintendent and 
principal of various schools in that locality. 

Since childhood, Markham had been writing verses of no 
extraordinary merit, one of his earliest pieces being a typically 
Bryonic echo (A Dream of Chaos) full of the high-sounding 
fustian of the period. Several years before he uttered his 
famous challenge, Markham was writing poems of protest, 
insurrectionary in theme but conventional in effect. Suddenly, 
in 1899, a new force surged through him; A sense of outrage 
at the inequality of human struggle voiced itself in the sweep- 
ing and sonorous poem, "The Man with the Hoe.'' (See 
Preface.) Inspired by Millet's painting, Markham made the 
bowed, broken French peasant a symbol of the poverty-stricken 
toiler in all lands — his was a protest not against labor but the 
drudgery, the soul-destroying exploitation of labor. " The Yeo- 

47 



Edwin Markham 

man is the landed and well-to-do farmer," says Markham, 
"you need shed no tears for him. But here in the Millet 
picture is his opposite— the Hoeman; the landless, the soul- 
blighted workman of the world, the dumb creature that has no 
time to rest, no time to think, no time for the hopes that make 
us men," . . . "The Man with the Hoe," with its demand 
for a keener sense of social responsibility, was not wholly cast 
in the key of challenge. It looked to a more expansive future 
when "all workers will think and all thinkers will work"; it 
answered Music's great trio of B.'s (Bach, Beethoven, Brahms) 
with the need of a greater three: "Bread, Beauty and Brother- 
hood." 

The success of the poem upon its appearance in the San 
Francisco Examiner (January 15, 1899) was instantaneous and 
universal. The lines appeared in every part of the globe; it 
was quoted and copied in every walk of life, in the literary 
world, the leisure world, the labor world. The same year of 
its publication, it was incorporated in Markham's first volume 
The Man with the Hoe, and Other Poems (1899). Two years 
later, his almost as well known poem was published. The same 
passion that ilred Markham to champion the great common 
workers equipped him to write fittingly of the Great Commoner 
in Lincoln, and Other Poems (1901). His later volumes are 
dignified and melodious but scarcely remarkable. Never reach- 
ing the heights of his two early classics, there are, nevertheless, 
many moments of a related nobility in The Shoes of Happiness 
(1914) and The Gates of Paradise (1920). 

Markham came East in 1901, his home being on Staten 
Island, New York. 

OUTWITTED 

He drew a circle that shut me out — 
Heretic, rebel, a thing to flout. 
But Love and I had the wit to win: 
We drew a circle that took him in ! 
48 



Edwin Markham 
THE MAN WITH THE HOE ^ 

{Written after seeing Millet's luorld-famous painting) 

Bowed by the weight of centuries he leans 
Upon his hoe and gazes on the ground, 
The emptiness of ages in his face, 
And on his back the burden of the world. 
Who made him dead to rapture and despair, 
A thing that grieves not and that never hopes. 
Stolid and stunned, a brother to the ox? 
Who loosened and let down this brutal jaw? 
Whose was the hand that slanted back this brow? 
Whose breath blew out the light within this brain ? 

Is this the Thing the Lord God made and gave 
To have dominion over sea and land; 
To trace the stars and search the heavens for power ; 
To feel the passion of Eternity? 
Is this the dream He dreamed who shaped the suns 
And marked their ways upon the ancient deep? 
Down all the caverns of Hell to their last gulf 
There is no shape more terrible than this — 
More tongued with censure of the world's blind greed- 
More filled with signs and portents for the soul — 
More packt with danger to the universe. 

What gulfs between him and the seraphim! 
Slave of the wheel of labor, what to him 

1 Revised version, 1920. Copyright by Edwin Markham. 
49 



Edwin Markham 

Are Plato and the swing of Pleiades? 
What the long reaches of the peaks of song, 
The rift of dawn, the reddening of the rose? 
Through this dread shape the suffering ages look; 
Time's tragedy is in that aching stoop; 
Through this dread shape humanity betrayed, 
Plundered, profaned, and disinherited. 
Cries protest to the Judges of the World, 
A protest that is also prophecy. 

O masters, lords and rulers in all lands. 

Is this the handiwork you give to God, 

This monstrous thing distorted and soul-quenched? 

How will you ever straighten up this shape ; 

Touch it again with immortality; 

Give back the upward looking and the light; 

Rebuild In it the music and the" dream; 

Make right the immemorial infamies, 

Perfidious wrongs, immedicable woes? 

O masters, lords and rulers in all lands. 
How will the Future reckon with this- man? 
How answer his brute question in that hour 
When whirlwinds of rebellion shake all shores? 
How will it be with kingdoms and with kings — 
With those who shaped him to the thing he is — 
When this dumb Terror shall rise to judge the world, 
After the silence of the centuries? 



50 



Edwin Markham 

PREPAREDNESS- 

For all your days prepare, 
And meet them ever alike: 

When you are the anvil, bear — 
When you are the hammer, strike. 



LINCOLN, THE MAN OF THE PEOPLE * 

When the Norn Mother saw the Whirlwind Hour 
Greatening and darkening as it hurried on, 
She left the Heaven of Heroes and came down 
To make a man to meet the mortal need. 
She took the tried clay of the common road — 
Clay warm yet with the genial heat of earth, 
Dasht through it all a strain of prophecy; 
Tempered the heap with thrill of human tears; 
Then" mixt a laughter with the serious stuff. 
Into the shape she breathed a flame to light 
That tender, tragic, ever-changing face; 
And laid on him a sense of the Mystic Powers, 
Moving — all husht — behind the mortal vail. 
Here was a man to hold against the world, 
A man to match the mountains and the sea. 

The color of the ground was in him, the red earth ; 

The smack and tang of elemental things: 

The rectitude and patience of the cliff; 

The good-will of the rain that loves all leaves; 

* See pages 114, 123, 232, 24.5, 252, 323. 
51 



Edwin Markham 

The friendly welcome of the wayside well; 
The courage of the bird that dares the sea; 
The gladness of the wind that shakes the corn; 
The pity of the snow that hides all scars; 
The secrecy of streams that make their way 
Under the mountain to the rifted rock; 
The tolerance and equity of light 
That gives as freely to the shrinking flower 
As to the great oak flaring to the wind — 
To the grave's low hill as to the Matterhorn 
That shoulders out the sky. Sprung from the West, 
He drank the valorous youth of a new world. 
The strength of virgin forests braced his mind, 
The hush of spacious prairies stilled his soul. 
His words were oaks in acorns; and his thoughts 
Were roots that firmly gript the granite truth. 

Up from log cabin to the Capitol, 
One fire was on his spirit, one resolve — 
To send the keen ax to the root of wrong, 
Clearing a free way for the feet of God, 
The eyes of conscience testing every stroke, 
To make his deed the measure of a man. 
He built the rail-pile as he built the State, 
Pouring his splendid strength through every blow: 
The grip that swung the ax in Illinois 
Was on the pen that set a people free. 

So came the Captain with the mighty heart; 
And when the judgment thunders split the house, 
S2 



Edwin Markham 

Wrenching the rafters from therr ancient rest, 
He held the ridgepole up, and spiked again 
The rafters of the Home. He held his place — 
Held the long purpose like a growing tree — 
Held on through blame and faltered not at praise. 
And when he fell in whirlwind, he went down 
As when a lordly cedar, green with boughs, 
Goes down with a great shout upon the hills, 
And leaves a lonesome place against the sky. 



C. E. S. Wood 

Charles Erskine Scott Wood was born at Erie, Pennsylvania, 
February 20, 1852, educated at the United States Military 
Academy (1874) and Columbia, where he received the degrees 
of Ph.B. and LL.B. in 1883. Wood served in the United States 
Army for almost ten years, acting as lieutenant in various cam- 
paigns against the Indians during 1877-8. He was admitted to 
the bar in 1884, practised at Portland, Oregon, and retired 
in 1919. 

In 1901, he published A Book of Tales, Being Myths of the 
North American Indians. In 1904, his symbolic A Masque of 
Love appeared. His finest work, however, is The Poet in the 
Desert (1915), a sonorous pageant of protest from which the 
two selections have been taken. 

SUNRISE 

The lean coyote, prowler of the night. 
Slips to his rocky fastnesses. 

Jack-rabbits noiselessly shuttle among the sage-brush, 
And, from the castellated cliffs, 

53 



a E. s. Wood 

Rock-ravens launch their proud black sails upon the day. 
The wild horses troop back to their pastures. 

The poplar-trees watch beside the irrigation-ditches. 
Orioles, whose nests sway in the cotton-wood trees by 

the ditch-side, begin to twitter. 
All shy things, breathless, watch 
The thin white skirts of dawn. 
The dancer of the sky. 
Who trips daintily down the mountain-side 
Emptying her crystal chalice. . . . 
And a red-bird, dipped in sunrise, cracks from a poplar's 

top 
His exultant whip above a silver world. 

THE DESERT 

She is a nun, withdrawing behind her veil; 

Grey, mysterious, meditative, unapproachable. 

Her body is tawny with the eagerness of the Sun 

And her eyes are pools which shine in deep canyons. 

She is a beautiful swart woman 

With opals at her throat. 

Rubies at her wrists 

And topaz about her ankles. 

Her breasts are like the evening and the day stars. 

She sits upon her throne of light, proud and silent. 
Indifferent to wooers. 

The Sun is her servitor, the stars her attendants. 
Running before her. 
She sings a song unto her own ears, 
54 



a E. s. Wood 

Solitary but sufBcient; 

The song of her being. 

She is a naked dancer, dancing upon 

A pavement of porphyry and pearl, 

Dazzling, so that the eyes must be shaded. 

She wears the stars upon her bosom 

And braids her hair with the constellations. 



Irwin Russell 

Irwin Russell was born, June 3, 1853, at Port Gibson, -Mis- 
sissippi, where he studied law and was admitted to the bar. 
His restless nature and wayward disposition drove him from 
one place to another, from dissipation to dissipation, from a 
not too rugged health to an utter breakdown. In July, 1879, 
he was forced to leave New York, working his way down to 
New Orleans on a coast steamer, trying to rehabilitate himself 
as reporter on the New Orleans Picayune. But illness pursued 
him and the following December Russell died, cut off, in the 
midst of his promise, before he had reached his twenty-seventh 
year. 

Although Russell did not take his poetry seriously and though 
the bulk of it is small, its influence has been large. Thomas 
Nelson Page and Joel Chandler Harris have acknowledged 
their indebtedness to him; the creator of Uncle Remus writing, 
" Irwin Russell was among the first — if not the very first — of 
Southern writers to appreciate the literary possibilities of the 
negro character." He entered their life, appreciated their fresh 
turns of thought, saw things with that peculiar mixture of 
reverence and unconscious humor that is so integral a part of 
negro songs and spirituals. " Blessing the Dance " and " The 
Song of the Banjo" (from Russell's operetta Christmas-Night 
in the Quarters, possibly his best known work) are excellent 

55 



Irwin Russell 

examples; faithful renderings of the mind of the old-fashioned, 
simple and sententious child of the plantation. In the latter 
poem the old story of Noah is told, with delightful additions, 
from the colorful angle of the darky; local in its setting, 
revealing in its quaint psychology. 

A collection of his poems appeared, with an introduction by 
Joel Chandler Harris, in 1888. In 1917, a more inclusive 
volume, beautifully printed, with illustrations by E. W. Kemble, 
was published by The Century Co.; it was entitled Christmas- 
Night in the Quarters. 

Russell died, in an obscure boarding house in New Orleans, 
December 23, 1879. 

BLESSING THE DANCE 

(From Christmas-Night in the Quarters) 

O Mahsr! let dis gath'rirf fin' a blessin' in yo' sight! 
Don't jedge us hard fur what we does — ^yo' know it's 

Chrismus-night ; 
An' all de balunce ob de yeah we cits as right's we kin. 
Ef dancin's wrong, O Mahsr! let de time excuse de sin! 

We labors in de vin'ya'd, wukin' hard an' wukin' true; 
Now, shorely yo' won't notus, ef we eats a grape or two, 
An' takes a leetle holiday, — a leetle restin'-spell, — 
Bekase, nex' week, we'll start in fresh, an' labor twicet 
as well. 

Remember, Mahsr, — min' dis now, — de sinfullness ob sin 
Is 'pendin' 'pon de sperrit what we goes an' does it in ; 
An' in a righchis frame ob min' we's gwine to dance 

an' sing, 
A-feelin' like King David, when he cut de pigeon-wing. 

56 



Irwin Russell 

It seems to me — indeed it do — I mebbe mout be wrong — 
Dat people raly ought to dance, when Chrismus comes 

along; 
Des dance bekase dey's happy — like de birds hops in de 

trees, 
De pine-top fiddle soundin' to be bowin' ob de breeze. 

We has no ark to dance afore, like Isrul's prophet king; 
We has no harp to soun' de chords, to holp us out to sing ; 
But 'cordin' to de gif's we has we does de bes' we knows. 
An' folks don't 'spise de vi'let-flower bekase it ain't de 
rose. 

Yes, bless us, please, Sah, eben ef we's doin' wrong 

to-night ; 
Kase den we'll need de blessin' more'n ef we's doin' right ; 
An' let de blessin's stay, wid us, untel we comes to die, 
An' goes to keep our Cl-nsmus wid dem sheriffs in de sky ! 

Yes, tell dem preshis anguls we's a-gwine to jine 'em soon: 
Our voices we's a-trainin' fur to sing de glory tune; 
We's ready when you wants us, an' it ain't no matter 

when. 
O Mahsr! call yo' chillen soon, an' take 'em home! Amen. 



57 



Irwin Russell 

DE FUST BANJO 

Go 'way, fiddle ! folks is tired o' hearin' you a-squawkin'. 
Keep silence fur yo' betters! don't you heah de banjo 

talkin'? 
About de 'possum's tail she's gwine to lecter — ^ladies, 

listen ! 
About de ha'r whut isn't dar, an' why de ha'r is missin': 

" Dar's gwine to be a' oberflow," said Noah, lookin' 

solemn — 
Fur Noah tuk de " Herald," an' he read de ribber 

column — 
An' so he sot his hands to wuk a-clarin' timber-patches, 
An' 'lowed he's gwine to build a boat to beat de steamah 

Natchez. 

or Noah kep' a-nailin' an' a-chippin' an' a-sawin' ; 

An' all de wicked neighbors kep' a-laughin' an' a-pshawin' ; 

But Noah didn't min' 'em, knowin' whut wuz gwine to 

happen : 
An' forty days an' forty nights de rain it kep' a-drappin'. 

Now, Noah had done cotched a lot ob ebry sort o' 
beas'es — 

Ob all de shows a-trabbelin', it beat 'em all to pieces! 

He had a Morgan colt an' sebral head o' Jarsey cattle — 

An' druv 'em 'board de Ark as soon's he heered de thun- 
der rattle. 

S8 



Irwtn Russell 

Den sech anoder fall ob rain! It come so awful hebby, 

De ribber riz immejitly, an' busted troo de lebbee; 

De people all wuz drownded out^ — 'cep' Noah an' de 

critters, 
An' men he'd hired to wuk de boat — an' one to mix de 

bitters. 

De Ark she kep' a-sailin' an' a-sailin' an a-sailin'; 
De lion got his dander up, an' like to bruk de palin'; 
De sarpints hissed; "de painters yelled; tel', whut wid 

all de fussin', 
You c'u'dn't hardly heah de mate a-bossin' 'roun' an' 

cussin'. 



Now Ham, de only nigger whut wuz runnin' on de 

packet, 
Got lonesome in de barber-shop, an' c'u'dn't stan' de 

racket ; 
An' so, fur to amuse he^se'f, he steamed some wood an' 

bent it. 
An' soon he had a banjo made — de fust dat wuz invented. 

He wet de ledder, stretched it on; made bridge an' 

screws an' aprin; 
An' fitted in a proper neck — 'twuz berry long an' taprin' ; 
He tuk some tin, an' twisted him a thimble fur to ring it : 
An' den de mighty question riz: how wuz he gwine to 

string it? 

59 



Irwin Russell 

De 'possum had as fine a tail as dis dat I's a-singin'; 
De ha'r's so long an' thick an' strong, — des fit fur banjo- 

stringin' ; 
Dat nigger shaved 'em off as short as washday-dinner 

graces : 
An' sorted ob 'em by de size — f'om little E's to basses. 

He strung her, tuned her, struck a jig, — 'twuz "Nebber 

min de wedder," — 
She soun' like forty-lebben bands a-playin' all togedder: 
Some went to pattin' ; some to dancin' : Noah called de 

figgers ; 
An' Ham he sot an' knocked de tune, de happiest ob 

niggers ! 

Now, sence dat time — it's mighty strange — dere's not de 

slightes' showin' 
Ob any ha'r at all upon de 'possum's tail a-growin' ; 
An' curi's, too, dat nigger's ways: his people nebber 

los' 'em — 
Fur whar you finds de nigger — dar's de banjo an' de 

'possum ! 

Edith M. Thomas 

Edith Matilda Thomas was born at Chatham, Ohio, August 
12, 1854. She was educated in the Normal Institute at Geneva, 
Ohio, and has been living in New York since 1888. 

Miss Thomas is the author of some dozen books of verse, 
most of them lightly lyrical in mood, although many of her 
individual poems have a spiritually dramatic quality. The 
best of her work may be found in Lyrics and Sonnets (1887) 
and The Flower from the Ashes (1915). 

60 



Edith M. Thomas 



" FROST TO-NIGHT " 

Apple-green west and an orange bar; 
And the crystal eye of a lone, one star . . . 
And, " Child, take the shears and cut what you will. 
Frost to-night — so clear and dead-still." 

Then I sally forth, half sad, half proud. 
And I come to the velvet, imperial crowd. 
The wine-red, the gold, the crimson, the pied, — 
The dahlias that reign by the garden-side. 

The dahlias I might not touch till to-night! 
A gleam of shears in the fading light. 
And I gathered them all, — the splendid throng. 
And in one great sheaf I bore them along. 

In my garden of Life with its all late flowers 
I heed a Voice in the shrinking hours: 
" Frost to-night — so clear and dead-still "... 
Half sad, half proud, my arms I fill. 



George Edward Woodberry 

George Edward Woodberry was born in Beverly, Mass., 
May 12, 1855, and studied at Harvard; his early efforts receiv- 
ing the approval of James Russell Lowell. From 1891 to 1904 
he was Professor of Comparative Literature at Columbia Uni- 
versity, where he exercised a keen influence on many of the 
younger writers. 

61 



George Edward Woodberry 

His work is decidedly romantic and classical in style, leaning 
heavily toward the Tennysonian tradition. Although there is 
an undercurrent of spiritual beauty throughout his poetry, he 
frequently loses his power of exaltation in a rhetoric that Is 
both stilted and sentimental. His chief collections of verse are 
The Flight and Other Poems (1900), Wild Eden (1914) and 
The Roamer and Other Poems (1920). He has also written 
several books of essays, criticism and biography. 



IMMORTAL LOVE 

Immortal Love, too high for my possessing, — ' 

Yet, lower than thee, where shall I find repose? 

Long in my youth I sang the morning rose, 
By earthly things the heavenly pattern guessing! 
Long fared I on, beauty and love caressing, 

And finding in my heart a place for those 

Eternal fugitives; the golden close 
Of evening folds me, still their sweetness blessing. 

Oh, happy we, the first-born heirs of nature. 
For whom the Heavenly Sun delays his light! 

He by the sweets of every mortal creature 
Tempers eternal beauty to our sight ; 

And by the glow upon love's earthly feature 
Maketh the path of our departure bright. 



62 



George Edward Woodberry 
A SONG OF SUNRISE 

{On the Morning of the Russian Revolution) 

To those who drink the golden mist 

Whereon the world's horizons rest, 
Who teach the peoples to resist 

The terrors of the human breast: — 
By burning stake and prison-camp 

They lead the march of man divine, 
Above whose head the sacred lamp 

Of liberty doth blaze and shine; 
O'er blood and tears and nameless woe 

They hail far off the dawning light; 
Through faith in them the nations go, 

Sun-smitten in the deepest night: — 
Honor to them from East to West 

Be on the shouting earth to-day! 
Holy their memory! Sweet their rest! 

Who fill the skies with freedom's ray! 

H. C. Bunner 

Henry Cuyler Bunner, one of our most delightful writers of 
light verse, was born at Oswego, New York, in 1855. At 
twenty-two he was appointed editor of Puck (then the most 
prominent of comic weeklies), a position which he held until 
his death. For more than ten years he wrote almost all the 
rhymed contributions to that journal — to say nothing of quan- 
tities of short stories (his Short Sixes, first published in 1890, 
are still well-known), prose paragraphs, topical parodies, edi- 

63 



H. C. Bunner 

torials, etc. Like Field, the artist was finally buried in the 
journalist; but, unlike him, Bunner kept the work of the serious 
poet separate from that of the manufacturer of satiric trifles. 
Yet, in spite of certain exquisite fragments in Airs from Arcady 
(1884) and Rowen: Second Crop Songs (1892), Bunner is likely 
to be remembered chiefly for his flippant 'vers de societe, his 
skilful and grave absurdities. 

"Behold the Deeds! " is a splendid example of Bunner's wit 
and technical ingenuity. It is a burlesque of the old ballads in 
the guise of a Chant-Royal, one of the strictest and most dif- 
ficult of the French forms. Another of his uncollected comic 
pieces ("Shake, Mulleary and Go-ethe") owes it origin to the 
fact that a certain Western poet (Joaquin Miller) had com- 
posed a poem in which the name of the author of " Faust " was 
made to rhyme with " teeth.'' Bunner not only adopted this 
rhyme, but carried the broad satire further by mispronouncing 
Moliere, achieving one of his happiest compositions. 

Bunner's was, at best, an artificial world, a world of graceful 
compliments, polite evasions, rhymed billets doux, with light 
sighs and lighter laughter tinkling among the tea-cups. Bunner 
died, in New Jersey, in 1896. 



SHAKE, MULLEARY AND GO-ETHE 

I have a bookcase, which is what 
Many much better men have not. 
There are no books inside, for books, 
I am afraid, might spoil its looks. 
But I've three busts, all second-hand, 
Upon the top. You understand 
I could not put them underneath — 
Shake, Mulleary and Go-ethe. 
64 



H. C. Bunner 

Shake was a dramatist of note; 
He lived by writing things to quote. 
He long ago put on his shroud; 
Some of his works are rather loud. 
His bald-spot's dusty, I suppose. 
I know there's dust upon his nose. 
I'll have to give each nose a sheath — 
Shake, Mulleary and Go-ethe. 

Mulleary's line was quite the same; 
He has more hair, but far less fame. 
I would not from that fame retrench — 
But he is foreign, being French. 
Yet high his haughty head he heaves, 
The only one done up in leaves. 
They're rather limited on wreath — 
Shake, Mulleary and Go-ethe. 

Go-ethe wrote in the German tongue: 
He must have learned it very young. 
His nose is quite a butt for scoff. 
Although an inch of it is off. 
He did quite nicely for the Dutch; 
But here he doesn't count for much. 
They all are off their native heath — 
Shake, Mulleary and Go-ethe. 

They sit there, on their chests, as bland 
As if they were not second-hand. 
I do not know of what they think, 
Nor why they never frown or wink. 
65 



H. C. Bunner 

But why from smiling they refrain 

I think I clearly can explain : 

They none of them could show much teeth — 

Shake, Mulleary and Go-ethe. 



BEHOLD THE DEEDS! 

(Being the Plaint of Adolphe Culpepper Ferguson-, Salesman of 
Fancy Notions, held in durance of his Landlady for a " fail- 
ure to connect" on Saturday night.) 

I would that all men my hard case would know, 

How grievously I suffer for no sin : 
I, Adolphe Culpepper Ferguson, for lo! 

I of my landlady am locked in 
For being short on this sad Saturday, 
Nor having shekels of silver wherewith to pay : 
She turned and is departed with my key; 
Wherefore, not even as other boarders free, 

I sing, (as prisoners to their dungeon-stones 
When for ten days they expiate a spree) : 

Behold the deeds that are done of Mrs. Jones! 

One night and one day have I wept my woe; 

Nor wot I, when the morrow doth begin, 
If I shall have to write to Briggs & Co., 

To pray them to advance the requisite tin 
For ransom of their salesman, that he may 
Go forth as other boarders go alway — 
As those I hear now flocking from their tea, 
66 



H. C. Bunner 

Led by the daughter of my landlady 

Piano-ward. This day, for all my moans, 

Dry-bread and water have been served me. 
Behold the deeds that are done of Mrs. Jones! 



Miss Amabel Jones is musical, and so 

The heart of the young he-boarder doth win, 
Playing " The Maiden's Prayer " adagio — 

That fetcheth him, as fetcheth the " bunko skin 
The innocent rustic. For my part, I pray 
That Badarjewska maid may wait for aye 
Ere sits she with a lover, as did we 
Once sit together, Amabel! Can it be 

That all that arduous wooing not atones 
For Saturday's shortness of trade dollars three? 

Behold the deeds that are done of Mrs. Jones! 



Yea! She forgets the arm that was wont to go 

Around her waist. She wears a buckle whose pin 
Galleth the crook of her young man's elbow. 

I forget not, for I that youth have been! 
Smith was aforetime the Lothario gay. 
Yet once, I mind me. Smith was forced to stay 
Close in his room. Not calm as I was he; 
But his noise brought no pleasaunce, verily. 

Small ease he got of playing on the bones 
Or hammering on the stove-pipe, that I see. 

Behold the deeds that are done of Mrs. Jones! 
67 



H. C. Bunner 

Thou, for whose fear the figurative crow 

I eat, accursed be thou and all thy kin! 
Thee I will show up — yea, up I will show 

Thy too-thick buckwheats and thy tea too thin. 
Ay! here I dare thee, ready for the fray: 
Thou dost not " keep a first-class house " I say! 
It does not with the advertisements agree. 
Thou lodgest a Briton with a puggaree. 

And thou hast harbored Jacobses and Cohns, 
Also a Mulligan. Thus denounce I thee! 

Behold the deeds that are done of Mrs. Jones! 

Envoy 
Boarders! the worst I have not told to ye: 
She hath stolen my trousers, that I may not flee 

Privily by the window. Hence these groans. 
There is no fleeing in a robe de nuit. 

Behold the deeds that are done of Mrs. Jones! 

A PITCHER OF MIGNONETTE ^ 

A pitcher of mignonette 

In a tenement's highest casement, — 

Queer sort of flower-pot — ^yet 

That pitcher of mignonette 

Is a garden in heaven set. 

To the little sick child in the basement — 

The pitcher of mignonette. 

In a tenement's highest casement. 
^ Reprinted, by permission, from Poems by H. C. Bunner. 
Copyright, 1899, by Charles Scribner's Sons. 

68 



Lizette Woodworth Reese 

Lizette Woodworth Reese was born January 9, 1856, at Balti- 
more, Maryland, where she has lived ever since. After an 
education obtained chiefly in private schools, she taught English 
in the Western High School at Baltimore. 

Her first book, A Branch of May (1887), seems, at first 
glance, to be merely a continuation of the tradition of English 
minor verse, pleasant and impersonal. But an undercurrent of 
emotion, a quiet intensity, makes one go back to these simple 
lyrics and prepares the reader for the charm of the ensuing 
volumes. 

A Handful of Lavender (1891), A Quiet Road (1896) and 
A Wayside Lute (1909) embody an artistry which, in spite of 
its old-fashioned contours, is as true as it is tender. A host 
of the younger lyricists owe much of their technique to her 
admirable models, and few modern sonneteers have equaled 
the blended music and symbolism of " Tears." 

TEARS 

When I consider Life and its few years — 
A wisp of fog betwixt us and the sun ; 
A call to battle, and the battle done 
Ere the last echo dies within our ears; 
A rose choked in the grass; an hour of fears; 
The gusts that past a darkening shore do beat; 
The burst of music down an unlistening street, — . 
I wonder at the idleness of tears. 
Ye old, old dead, and ye of yesternight, 
Chieftains, and bards, and keepers of the sheep. 
By every cup of sorrow that you had. 
Loose me from tears, and make me see aright 
How each hath back what once he stayed to weep : 
Homer his sight, David his little lad! 
69 



Lizette Woodworth Reese 



THE DUST 

The dust blows up and down 
Within the lonely town; 
Vague, hurrying, dumb, aloof, 
On sill and bough and roof. 

What cloudy shapes do fleet 
Along the parched street; 
Clerks, bishops, kings go by — 
Tomorrow so shall I. 



SPICEWOOD 

The spicewood burns along the gray, spent sky, 
In moist unchimneyed places, in a wind, 
That whips it all before, and all behind. 
Into one thick, rude flame, now low, now high. 
It is the first, the homeliest thing of all — 
At sight of it, that lad that by it fares, 
Whistles afresh his foolish, town-caught airs — 
A thing so honey-colored and so tall! 

It is as though the young Year, ere he pass. 
To the white riot of the cherry tree. 
Would fain accustom us, or here, or there. 
To his new sudden ways with bough and grass, 
So starts with what is humble, plain to see, 
And all familiar as a cup, a chair. 
70 



Horace Traubel 

Horace Traubel, often referred to as " Whitman's Boswell," 
was born in Camden, New Jersey, December 19, 1858, of mixed 
Jewish and Christian parentage. His scholastic education was 
desultory; after leaving school he sold newspapers, worked as 
an errand boy and helped his father in a stationery store. 
Later he became a printer's devil, proof-reader, reporter and 
editorial writer. In 1873 Walt Whitman came to Camden, 
little dreaming he would spend the remainder of his life there. 
He was almost friendless, a sick man, helpless and alone. The 
Traubel household welcomed him in and an extraordinary 
friendship sprang up immediately between the aging poet and 
the young boy. Traubel saw Whitman some part of each day 
for almost twenty years. " As the years fled," says David 
Karsner in his Life of Horace Traubel, " he catered to Whit- 
man's needs in a hundred different ways. He would bring Old 
Walt such papers and magazines as he knew would interest 
him. He ran his errands . and assumed the details and 

responsibilities connected with the publishing of the later edi- 
tions of Whitman's books." This intimacy is fully recorded in 
Traubel's chief work, a series of volumes. With JValt Whitman 
in Camden, a compilation of extraordinary value which has 
been called " Whitman's unconscious autobiography." 

It is inevitable that Traubel's own poetry should betray the 
strong influence of his great friend and hero. And yet in 
several poems in Opiimos (1910) and Chants Communal (1914) 
Traubel achieves a personal idiom; beneath the wearying 
length and repetitive phrases, he communicates the fire of the 
social revolutionist, the insurgent who wrote, " I build no fires 
to burn anybody up. I only build fires to light up the way." 

Traubel died at Bon Echo, Ontario, Canada, where he had 
gone for his health, September 8, 1919. 



71 



Horace Traubel 



HOW ARE YOU, DEAR WORLD, THIS 
MORNING? 

How are you, dear world, this morning? 

Clean from my bath of sleep, 

Warm from the bosom of my mother star. 

Recharged with the energy of my father self. 

Restored from all derelict hours to the lawful service 

of time, 
I come without gift or doctrine or tethering humor 
To entertain your fateful will. 

How are you, dear world, this morning? 

I went to bed last night in the twist and snarl of a 

problem. 
Have you awakened me to a revelation? 
Has some change come upon the face of the earth and 

the heart of man? 
Was life still busy while my life slept? 
Was something done with the dreams of my sorrow and 

joy to transfigure in man the drag of his daily task? 
Have all the prophets who died unfulfilled and all the 

plain men and women and children who burned 

or starved from injustice come back to earth to 

partake of a deferred feast? 
What is it, dear world, I bring with empty hands to your 

morning? 
What is it, dear world, you bring with hands as empty 

to my bedside? 

72 



Horace Traubel 

Do the things that were stolen remain stolen? 

Do the lives that were destroyed remain dead ? 

Do the stragglers who failed still fail? 

Does the sleeper who slept the sleep of the merchant 
awake only to the merchant? 

Does the law that was yesterday at my throat awake only 
to the law? 

Does the singer awake only to sing, the artist to paint, 
and the orator to talk? 

Or does the merchant awake to the man? 

Or does the law of the state awake to the law of the heart? 

Or do stolen things shift back into right relations? 

Or is the singer silent, or does the artist put aside his 
paints, or has the orator stopt talking, because 
something greater than song or art or eloquence 
has appeared in the face of the multitude? 

How are you, dear world, this morning? 

\Ve have had confidences other days but somehow the 

confidences of this day are sweetest of all, 
They find me where I am remote, they seek me out 

where I am reluctant, they confirm me where I 

am weak. 
They melt me down from flaw and angle into purity 

and circle. 
They interpret me to last night's strangers and they in- 
troduce me to the real meanings of my vagrant 

past. 
They remove me from my quarrels and they deliver me 

to truce and peace. 

73 



Horace Traubel 

For now I see that when of old I thought of justice 
and believed I was dreaming that only then was 
I awake, 

For now I see that the wrongdoer is the first to with- 
draw wrong and is the only one who can with- 
draw it, 

For now I see that all the effort I spent trying to dis- 
cover why lives were beautiful or ugly has shown 
me that all ugliness and all beauty finally must 
lapse in one transfiguration, 

For now in the confidences o~f this morning, in the rap- 
ture of this awakening, I find my illimitable roots 
trailed backward and forward and round into all 
time and all men. 

Pledging my love to countless surrenders and repeals. 



O MY DEAD COMRADE 

{for W. W.) 

my dead comrade — my great dead! 

1 sat by your bedside — it was the close of day — 

I heard the drip of the rain on the roof of the house: 

The light shadowed — departing, departing — 

You also departing, departing — 

You and the light, companions in life, now, too, com- 
panions in death, 

Retiring to the shadow, carrying elsewhere the benedic- 
tion of your sunbeams. 

■74 



Horace Traubel 

I sat by your bedside. I held your hand: 

Once you opened your eyes: O look of recognition! 

O look of bestowal! 
From you to me then passed the commission of the future, 
From you to me that minute, from your veins to mine. 
Out of the flood of passage, as you slipped away with 

the tide. 
From your hand that touched mine, from your soul that 

touched mine, near, O so near — 
Filling the heavens with stars — 
Entered, shone upon me and out of me, the power of the 

spring, the seed of the rose and the wheat, 
As of father to son, as of brother to brother, as of god 

to god ! 

O my great dead! 

You had not gone, you had stayed — in my heart, in my 

veins. 
Reaching through me, through others through me, 

through all at last, our brothers, 
A hand to the future. 



Frank Dempster Sherman 

Frank Dempster Sherman was born at Peekskill, New York, 
May 6, i860. He entered Columbia University in 1879, where, 
after graduation and a subsequent instructorship, he was made 
adjunct professor in 1891 and Professor of Graphics in 1904. 
He held the latter position until his death, which occurred 
September 19, 1916. 

75 



Frank Dempster Sherman 

Besides being a writer of airy lyrics and epigrammatic 
quatrains, Sherman was an enthusiastic genealogist and a de- 
signer (especially of book-plates) of no little skill. As a poet, 
his gift was essentially that of a writer of light verse — fra- 
grant, fragile, yet seldom too sentimental or brittle. Pleasant 
is the name for it, a pleasantness perfumed with a pungent wit. 

Sherman never wearied of the little lyric; even the titles 
of his volumes are instances of his penchant for the brief 
melody, for the sudden snatch of song: Madrigals and Catches 
(1887), Lyrics for a Lute (1890), Little-Folk Lyrics (1892), 
Lyrics of Joy (1904). A sumptuous collected edition of his 
poems was published, with an Introduction by Clinton Scollard, 
in 1917. 

AT MIDNIGHT 

See, yonder, the belfry tower 
That gleams in the moon's pale light — 

Or is it a ghostly flower 

That dreams in the silent night? 

I listen and hear the chime 
Go quavering over the town, 

And out of this flower of Time 
Twelve petals are wafted down. 



BACCHUS 

Listen to the tawny thief. 
Hid beneath the waxen leaf, 
Growling at his fairy host, 
Bidding her with angry boast 



76 



Frank Dempster Sherman 

Fill his cup with wine distilled 
From the dew the dawn has spilled: 
Stored away in golden casks 
Is the precious draught he asks. 

Who, — who makes this mimic din 
In this mimic meadow inn, 
Sings in such a drowsy note, 
Wears a golden-belted coat; 
Loiters in the dainty room 
Of this tavern of perfume; 
Dares to linger at the cup 
Till the yellow sun is up? 

Bacchus 'tis, come back again 
To the busy haunts of men; 
Garlanded and gaily dressed, 
Bands of gold about his breast; 
Straying from his paradise. 
Having pinions angel-wise, — 
'Tis the honey-bee, who goes 
Reveling within a rose! 



TWO QUATRAINS 

IVY 

Upon the walls the graceful Ivy climbs 
And wraps with green the ancient ruin gray: 

Romance it is, and these her leafy rhymes 
Writ on the granite page of yesterday. 
77 



Frank Dempster Sherman 

DAWN 

Out of the scabbard of the night 

By God's hand drawn, 
Flashes his shining sword of light, 

And lo — the dawn! 



Charlotte P. S. Oilman 

Charlotte Perkins Stetson Gilman was born at Hartford, Con- 
necticut, July 3, i860. She began public work in 1890, lectur- 
ing on ethics, economics and sociology; identifying herself with 
the labor question and the advance of women. 

She has written about a dozen books, her best works being 
Woman and Economics (1898) and Human Work (1904). Her 
volume of verse. In This Our World (1898), hurls many a 
shaft of ironic wit. Beneath the whimsical humor of "A 
Conservative" and the better known "Similar Cases" (unfor- 
tunately too long to quote) there is a sub-acid satire not easily 
forgotten. 



A CONSERVATIVE 

The garden beds I wandered by 
One bright and cheerful morn. 

When I found a new-fledged butterfly, 
A-sitting on a thorn, 

A black and crimson butterfly 
All doleful and forlorn. 
78 



Charlotte P. S. Gilman 

I thought that life could have no sting 

To infant butterflies, 
So I gazed on this unhappy thing 

With wonder and surprise. 
While sadly with his waving wing 

He wiped his weeping eyes. 

Said I, "What can the matter be? 

Why weepest thou so sore? 
With garden fair and sunlight free 

And flowers in goodly store," — 
But he only turned away from me 

And burst into a roar. 

Cried he, " My legs are thin and few 
Where once I had a swarm! 

Soft fuzzy fur — a joy to view — 
Once kept my body warm, 

Before these flapping wing-things greWj 
To hamper and deform!" 

At that outrageous bug I shot 

The fury of mine eye ; 
Said I, in scorn all burning hot. 

In rage and anger high, 
" You ignominious idiot ! 

Those wings are made to fly ! " 

" I do not want to fly," said he, 
" I only want to squirm! " 
79 



Charlotte P. S. Gilman 

And he drooped his wings dejectedly, 

But still his voice was firm: 
" I do not want to be a fly ! 

I want to be a worm ! " 

yesterday of unknown lack, 
To-day of unknown bliss! 

1 left my fool in red and black; 
The last I saw was this, — 

The creature madly climbing back 
Into his chrysalis. 

Louise Imogen Guiney 

Louise Imogen Guiney was born at Boston, Massachusetts, in 
1861. Although she attended Elmhurst Academy in Providence, 
most of her studying was with private tutors. In 1901 she went 
to England, where she lived until her death. 

Traditional in form and feeling. Miss Guiney's work has a 
distinctly personal vigor ; even her earliest collection, The IV kite 
Sail and Other Poems (1887), is not without individuality. 
Her two most characteristic volumes are A Roadside Harp 
(1893) and Patrins (1897). A more recent publication, Happy 
Ending, appeared in 1909. 

Miss Guiney died at Chirping-Caraden, England, November 
3, 1920. 

THE WILD RIDE 

/ hear in my heart, I hear in its ominous pulses. 
All day, on the road, the hoofs of invisible horses. 
All night, from their stalls, the importunate pawing and 
neighing. 

80 



Louise Imogen Guiney 

Let cowards and laggards fall back! But alert to the 

saddle 
Weatherworn and abreast, go men of our galloping 

legion, 
With a stirrup-cup each to the lily of women that loves 

him. 

The trail is through dolor and dread, over crags and 

morasses ; 
There are shapes by the way, there are things that appal 

or entice us: 
What odds? We are Knights of the Grail, we are 

vowed to the riding. 

Thought's self is a vanishing wing, and joy is a cobweb, 
And friendship a flower in the dust, and glory a sunbeam : 
Not here is our prize, nor, alas ! after these our pursuing. 

A dipping of plumes, a tear, a shake of the bridle, 
A passing salute to this world and her pitiful beauty ; 
We hurry with never a word in the track of our fathers. 

/ hear in my heart, I hear in its ominous pulses, 
All day, on the road, the hoofs of invisible horses, 
All night, from their stalls, the importunate pawing and 
neighing. 

We spur to a land of no name, outracing the storm-wind ; 
We leap to the infinite dark like sparks from the anvil. 
Thou leadest, O God! All's well with Thy troopers 
that follow. 

8i 



Bliss Carman 

(William) Bliss Carman was born at Fredericton, New 
Brunswick, Canada, April 15, 1861, of a long line of United 
Empire Loyalists who withdrew from Connecticut at the time 
of the Revolutionary War. Carman was educated at the Uni- 
versity of New Brunswick (1879-81), at Edinburgh (1882-3) 
and Harvard (1886-8). He took up his residence in the 
United States about 1889 and, with the exception of short so- 
journs in the Maritime Provinces, has lived there ever since. 

In 1893, Carman issued his first book. Low Tide on Grand 
Pre: A Book of Lyrics. It was immediately successful, running 
quickly into a second edition. From the outset, it was evident 
that Carman possessed the true lyrical power: the ability to 
fuse thought in emotion, to interpret the external world through 
a personal intensity. Simple and direct in his choice of themes, 
his passion made them universal. A vivid buoyancy, new to 
American literature, made his worship of Nature frankly pagan 
as contrasted to the moralizing tributes of most of his prede- 
cessors. This freshness and irresponsible whimsy made Carman 
the natural collaborator for Richard Hovey, and when their 
first joint Songs from Vagabondia appeared in 1894. Carman's 
fame was established. (See Preface.) 

Although the three Vagabondia collections contain Carman's 
best known poems, several of his other volumes (he has pub- 
lished almost twenty of them) vibrate with the same glowing 
pulse. An almost physical radiance rises from Ballads of Lost 
Haven (1897), From the Booh of Myths (1902) and Songs of 
the Sea Children (1904). 

Carman has also written several volumes of essays and, in 
conjunction with Mary Perry King, has devised several poem- 
dances (Daughters of Dawn, 1913) suggesting Vachel Lind- 
say's later poem-games. In his collection April Airs (1916), 
although the strength is diluted and the music somewhat thinned, 
the old magic persists; the spell may be overfamiliar but it is 
not powerless. 



82 



Bliss Carman 

A VAGABOND SONG 

There is something in the autumn that is native to my 

blood — 
Touch of manner, hint of mood; 
And my heart is liice a rhyme, 
With the yellow and the purple and the crimson keeping 

time. 

The scarlet of the maples can shake me like a cry 

Of bugles going by. 

And my lonely spirit thrills 

To see the frosty asters like a smoke upon the hills. 

There is something in October sets the gypsy blood astir; 

We must rise and follow her. 

When from every hill of flame 

She calls and calls each vagabond by name. 

THE GRAVEDIGGER 

Oh, the shambling sea is a sexton old. 
And well his work is done. 
With an equal grave for lord and knave. 
He buries them every one. 

Then hoy and rip, with a rolling hip. 
He makes for the nearest shore; 
And God, who sent him a thousand ship. 
Will send him a thousand more; 
83 



Bliss Carman 

But some he'll save for a bleaching grave, 
And shoulder them in to shore, — 
Shoulder them in, shoulder them in, 
Shoulder them in to shore. 

Oh, the ships of Greece and the ships of Tyre 
Went out, and where are they? 
In the port they made, they are delayed 
With the ships of yesterday. 

He follovi^ed the ships of England far. 
As the ships of long ago ; 
And the ships of France they led him a dance, 
But he laid them all mow. 

Oh, a loafing, idle lubber to him 

Is the sexton of the town ; 

For sure and swift, with a guiding lift. 

He shovels the dead men down. 

But though he delves so fierce and grim. 
His honest graves are wide. 
As well they know who sleep below 
The dredge of the deepest tide. 

Oh, he works with a rollicking stave at lip. 
And loud is the chorus skirled; 
With the burly rote of his rumbling throat 
He batters it down the world. 
84 



Bliss Carman 

He learned it once in his father's house, 
Where the ballads of eld were sung; 
And merry enough is the burden rough, 
But no man knows the tongue. 

Oh, fair, they say, was* his bride to see, 
And wilful she must have been, 
That she could bide at his gruesome side 
When the first red dawn came in. 

And sweet, they say, is her kiss to those 
She greets to his border home; 
And softer than sleep her hand's first sweep 
That beckons, and they come. 

Oh, crooked is he, but strong enough 
To handle the tallest mast; 
From the royal barque to the slaver dark. 
He buries them all at last. 

Then hoy and rip, with a rolling hip. 

He makes for the nearest shore; 

And God, who sent him a thousand ship, 

Will send him a thousand ?nore; 

But some he'll save for a bleaching grave. 

And shoulder them in to shore, — 

Shoulder them in, shoulder them in. 

Shoulder them in to shore. 



85 



Bliss Carman 



HEM AND HAW 

Hem and Haw were the sons of sin, 
Created to shally and shirk; 
Hem lay 'round and Haw looked on 
While God did all the work. 

Hem was a fogy, and Haw was a prig. 
For both had the dull, dull mind ; 
And whenever they found a thing to do. 
They yammered and went it blind. 

Hem was the father of bigots and bores; 

As the sands of the sea were they. 

And Haw was the father of all the tribe 

Who criticize to-day. 

But God was an artist from the first. 

And knew what he was about; 

While over his shoulder sneered these two. 

And advised him to rub it out. 

They prophesied ruin ere man was made; 
"Such folly must surely fail!" 
And when he was done, " Do you think, my Lord, 
He's better without a tail?" 

And still in the honest working world. 
With posture and hint and smirk. 
These sons of the devil are standing by 
While man does all the work. 
86 



Bliss Carman 

They balk endeavor and baffle reform, 
In the sacred name of law; 
And over the quavering voice of Hem 
Is the droning voice of Haw. 

DAISIES 

Over the shoulders and slopes of the dune 
I saw the white daisies go down to the sea, 
A host in the sunshine, an army in June, 
The people God sends us to set our hearts free. 

The bobolinks rallied them up from the dell. 
The orioles whistled them out of the wood ; 
And all of their singing was, " Earth, it is well ! " 
And all of their dancing was, " Life, thou art good ! " 



Richard Burton 

Richard (Eugene) Burton was born at Hartford, Connecticut, 
March 14, i86i. He has taught English at various colleges 
and universities since 1888, and has been head of the English 
department of the University of Minnesota since 1906. His 
first book. Dumb in June (1895), is, in many ways, his best. It 
contains a buoyant lyricism, a more conscious use of the strain 
developed in Carman and Hovey's Songs from Vagabondia — a 
mood which he has never surpassed. Much of his other verse 
is far less distinctive, being what might be called " anonymous 
poetry": a poetry that has, in spite of certain excellent qualities, 
little trace of the individual and practically no stamp of per- 
sonality or place. The succeeding Lyrics of Brotherhood (1899) 
has a wider vision if a more limited music; several of the poems 

87 



Richard Burton 

in this collection reflect the hungers, dreams and unsung 
melodies of the dumb and defeated multitudes. From the Book 
of Life (1909) has scarcely as much power and less poetry. 

Besides his verse, Burton has written several books of essays, 
a life of Whittier and various volumes on the drama. 



BLACK SHEEP 

From their folded mates they wander far, 
Their ways seem harsh and wild ; 

They follow the beck of a baleful star, 
Their paths are dream-beguiled. 

Yet haply they sought but a wider range, 

Some loftier mountain-slope, 
And little recked of the country strange 

Beyond the gates of hope. 

And haply a bell with a luring call 

Summoned their feet to tread 
Midst the cruel rocks, where the deep pitfall 

And the lurking snare are spread. 

Maybe, in spite of their tameless days 

Of outcast liberty. 
They're sick at heart for the homely ways 

Where their gathered brothers be. 

And oft at night, when the plains fall dark 
And the hills loom large and dim. 

For the Shepherd's voice they mutely hark. 
And their souls go out to him. 
88 



Richard Burton 

Meanwhile, " Black sheep! Black sheep! " we cry, 

Safe in the inner fold; 
And maybe they hear, and wonder why, 

And marvel, out in the cold. 



Oliver Herford 

Oliver Herford was born in December, 1863, at Manchester, 
England. He studied art in London and at Julien's in Paris, 
turned to literature as a pastime and, about 1890, came to the 
United States, where he has lived ever since. 

Herford, celebrated as a wit as well as a draughtsman and 
versifier, is the author of no less than twenty volumes of light 
verse, prose pasquinades and burlesques. His The Bashful 
Earthquake (1898), Rubaiyat of a Persian Kitten (1904) and 
This Giddy Globe (1919) show Herford's delicate skill and his 
versatile dexterity. These volumes, like most of Herford's, are 
embellished by his own drawings, which are fully as graceful 
as the accompanying verses. 

EARTH ^ 

If this little world to-night 

Suddenly should fall through space 
In a hissing, headlong flight, 

Shrivelling from off its face, 
As it falls into the sun, 

In an instant every trace 
Of the little crawling things — ■ 

Ants, philosophers, and lice, 

^ Reprinted from The Bashful Earthquake by Oliver Herford. 
Copyright, 1898, by Charles Scribner's Sons. 

89 



Oliver Herford 

Cattle, cockroaches, and Icings, 
Beggars, millionaires, and mice, 

Men and maggots all as one 

As it falls into the sun. . . . 

Who can say but at the same 
Instant from some planet far, 

A child may watch us and exclaim: 
"See the pretty shooting star!" 



THE ELF AND THE DORMOUSE 

Under a toadstool crept a wee Elf, 
Out of the rain to shelter himself. 

Under the toadstool, sound asleep, 
Sat a big Dormouse all in a heap. 

Trembled the wee Elf, frightened and yet 
Fearing to fly away lest he get wet. 

To the next shelter — maybe a mile! 
Sudden the wee Elf smiled a wee smile. 

Tugged till the toadstool toppled in two. 
Holding it over him, gaily he flew. 

Soon he was safe home, dry as could be. 
Soon woke the Dormouse — " Good gracious me ! 

"Where is my toadstool?" loud he lamented. 
— And that's how umbrellas first were invented. 
90 



Richard Hovey 



Richard Hovey was born in 1864. at Normal, Illinois, and 
graduated from Dartmouth in 1885. After leaving college, he 
became, in rapid succession, a theologian, an actor, a journalist, 
a lecturer, a professor of English literature at Barnard, a poet 
and a dramatist. 

His first volume. The Laurel: An Ode (1889), betrayed the 
overmusical influence of Lanier and gave promise of that ex- 
traordinary facility which often brought Hovey perilously close 
to the pit of mere technique. His exuberant virility found its 
outlet in the series of poems published in collaboration with 
Bliss Carman — the three volumes of Songs from Vagabondia 
(1894, 1896, 1900). Here he let himself go completely; nothing 
remained sober or static. His lines fling themselves across the 
page; dance with intoxicating abandon; shout with a wild 
irresponsibility; leap, laugh, carouse and carry off the reader 
in a gale of high spirits. The famous Stein Song is but an 
interlude in the midst of a far finer and even more rousing 
poem that, with its flavor of Whitman, begins: 

I said in my heart, " I am sick of four walls and a ceiling. 

I have need of the sky. 

I have business with the grass. 

I will up and get me away where the hawk is wheeling. 

Lone and high. 

And the slow clouds go by. 

I will get me away to the waters that glass 

The clouds as they pass. . . ." 

Hovey's attitude to his art may be expressed in no better way 
than his own words concerning the poet: " It is not his mission," 
wrote Hovey in the Dartmouth Magazine, " to write elegant 
canzonettas for the delectation of the dilettanti, but to comfort 
the sorrowful and hearten the despairing, to champion the op- 
pressed and declare to humanity its inalienable rights, to lay 
open to the world the heart of man — all its heights and depths, 
all its glooms and glories, to reveal the beauty in things and 
breathe into his fellows a love of it." This almost too con- 

91 



Richard Hovey 

scious awareness of the poet's " mission " often marred Hovey's 
work; in responding to his program, he frequently over- 
stressed his ringing enthusiasm, strained his own muscularity. 
But his power was as unflagging as his fraternal energy was 
persuasive. And in certain quieter moods the poet rose to new 
heights. The work on which he was engaged at the time of 
his death is significant; Launcelot and Guenevere: A Poem in 
Five Dramas is magnificent in its restrained vitality. 

Although the varied lyrics in Songs from Vagahondia are the 
best known examples of Hovey, a more representative collec- 
tion of his riper work may be found in Along the Trail (1898). 
This volume contains "Spring" and the stirring "Comrades" 
in full as well as the best of his vivid fragments. 

Hovey died, during his thirty-sixth year, in 1900. 



AT THE CROSSROADS 

You to the left and I to the right. 

For the ways of men must sever — 

And it well may be for a day and a night, 

And it well may be forever. 

But whether we meet or whether we part 

(For our ways are past our knowing), 

A pledge from the heart to its fellow heart 

On the ways we all are going! 

Here's luck! 

For we know not where we are going. 

Whether we win or whether we lose 
With the hands that life is dealing, 
It is not we nor the ways we choose 
But the fall of the cards that's sealing. 
92 



Richard Hovey 

There's a fate in love and a fate in fight, 

And the best of us all go under — 

And whether we're wrong or whether we're right, 

We win, sometimes, to our wonder. 

Here's luck! 

That we may not yet go under! 

With a steady swing and an open brow 

We have tramped the ways together, 

But we're clasping hands at the crossroads novv' 

In the Fiend's own night for weather ; 

And whether we bleed or whether we smile 

In the leagues that lie before us 

The ways of life are many a mile 

And the dark of Fate is o'er us. 

Here's luck! 

And a cheer for the dark before us ! 

You to the left and I to the right, 

For the ways of men must sever. 

And it well may be for a day and a night 

And it well may be forever! 

But whether we live or whether we die 

(For the end is past our knowing). 

Here's two frank hearts and the open sky. 

Be a fair or an ill wind blowing! 

Here's luck! 

In the teeth of all winds blowing. 



93 



Richard Hovey 

UNMANIFEST DESTINY 

To what new fates, my country, far 
And unforeseen of foe or friend, 

Beneath what unexpected star 
Compelled to what unchosen end, 

Across the sea that knows no beach, 
The Admiral of Nations guides 

Thy blind obedient keels to reach 
The harbor where thy future rides! 

The guns that spoke at Lexington 

Knew not that God was planning then 

The trumpet word of Jefferson 
To bugle forth the rights of men. 

To them that wept and cursed Bull Run, 
What was it but despair and shame? 

Who saw behind the cloud the sun? 
Who knew that God was in the flame? 

Had not defeat upon defeat, 

Disaster on disaster come. 
The slave's emancipated feet 

Had never marched behind the drum. 

There is a Hand that bends our deeds 
To mightier issues than we planned ; 

Each son that triumphs, each that bleeds, 
My country, serves It's dark command. 
94 



Richard Hovey 

I do not know beneath what sky 
Nor on what seas shall be thy fate; 

I only know it shall be high, 
I only know it shall be great. 

LOVE IN THE WINDS 

When I am standing on a mountain crest, 
Or hold the tiller in the dashing spray. 
My love of you leaps foaming in my breast, 
Shouts with the winds and sweeps to their foray. 
My heart bounds with the horses of the sea 
And plunges in the wild ride of the night. 
Flaunts in the teeth of tempest the large glee 
That rides out Fate and welcomes gods to fight. 

Ho, love, I laugh aloud for love of you, 
Glad that our love is fellow to rough weather, — 
No fretful orchid hothoused from the dew. 
But hale and hardy as the highland heather. 
Rejoicing in the wind that stings and thrills, 
Comrade of ocean, playmate of the hills. 

A STEIN SONG 

(From "Spring") 

Give a rouse, then, in the Maytime 

For a life that knows no fear! 
Turn night-time into daytime 

With the sunlight of good cheer! 
95 



Richard Hovey 

For it's always fair weather 
When good fellows get together, 
With a stein on the table and a good song 
ringing clear. 

When the wind comes up from Cuba, 

And the birds are on the wing. 
And our hearts are patting juba 
To the banjo of the spring, 

Then it's no wonder whether 
The boys will get together, 
With a stein on the table and a cheer for 
everything. 

For we're all frank-and-twenty 

When the spring is in the air; 
And we've faith and hope a-plenty. 
And we've life and love to spare: 
And it's birds of a feather 
When we all get together. 
With a stein on the table and a heart with- 
out a care. 

For we know the world is glorious. 

And the goal a golden thing, 
And that God is not censorious 

When his children have their fling; 
And life slips its tether 
When the boys get together, 
With a stein on the table in the fellowship 
of spring. 

96 



Madison Cawein 

Madison (Julius) Cawein was born in Louisville, Kentucky, 
in 1865, and spent most of his life in the state of his birth. He 
wrote an enormous quantity of verse, publishing more than 
twenty volumes of pleasant, sometimes exuberant but seldom 
distinguished poetry. Lyrics and Idyls (1890) and Vale of 
Tempe (1905) contain his most characteristic stanzas, packed 
with the lush, adjectival love of Nature that led certain of his 
admirers to call him (and, one must ^dmit, the alliteration 
was tempting) " the Keats of Kentucky." 

Cawein's work divides itself into two distinct veins. In the 
one, he dealt with the scenes and incidents of his mountain 
environment: the sag of an old house in the hills, the echoes 
of a feud, rumblings of the Ku Klux Klan, the ghastly details of 
a lynching. In his other mood (the one which unfortunately 
possessed him the greater part of the time) he spent page after 
page romanticizing Nature, touching up his already painted 
lilies, polishing his thinly-plated artificialities until the base 
metal showed through. He pictured all outdoors with pains- 
taking detail. And yet it is somehow unreal, prettified, remote. 
Every now and then, with an irritating frequency, he tries to 
transport his audience to a literary Fairyland ; but the reader 
is quickly wearied by the almost interminable procession of 
fays, gnomes, nixies, elves, dryads, sprites, pucks, fauns — be 
they ever so lyrical. 

In spite of Cawein's too profuse lyricism, several of his pieces 
will doubtless remain, though it is not likely that the survivors 
will be the sugared sweetmeats by which his champions (includ- 
ing William Dean Howells) set such store. 

Cawein died in Kentucky in 1914. 



97 



Madison Cawein 



SNOW 

The moon, like a round device 
On a shadowy shield of war, 
Hangs white in a heaven of ice 
With a solitary star. 

The wind has sunk to a sigh, 
And the waters are stern with frost; 
And gray, in the eastern sky, 
The last snow-cloud is lost. 

White fields, that are winter-starved, 
Black woods, that are winter-fraught, 
Cold, harsh as a face death-carved, 
With the iron of some black thought. 



THE MAN HUNT^ 

The woods stretch wild to the mountain side. 
And the brush is deep where a man may hide. 

They have brought the bloodhounds up again 
To the roadside rock where they found the slain. 

They have brought the bloodhounds up, and they 
Have taken the trail to the mountain way. 

^ Taken by permission from The Vale of Tempe by Madison 
Cawein. Copyright, 1905, by E. P. Dutton and Co., New York. 

98 



Madison Caw e in 

Three times they circled the trail and crossed, 
And thrice they found it and thrice they lost. 

Now straight through the pines and the underbrush 
They follow the scent through the forest's hush. 

And their deep-mouthed bay is a pulse of fear 
In the heart of the wood that the man must hear. 

The man who crouches among the trees 
From the stern-faced men that follow these. 

A huddle of rocks that the ooze has mossed — 
And the trail of the hunted again is lost. 

An upturned pebble; a bit of ground 
A heel has trampled — the trail is found. 

And the woods re-echo the bloodhounds' bay 
As again they take to the mountain way. 

A rock; a ribbon of road; a ledge, 

With a pine-tree clutching its crumbling edge. 

A pine, that the lightning long since clave, 
Whose huge roots hollow a ragged cave. 

A shout; a curse; and a face aghast, 
And the human quarry is laired at last, 
99 



Madison Cawein 

The human quarry, with clay-clogged hair 
And eyes of terror, who waits them there; 

That glares and crouches and rising then 
Hurls clods and curses at dogs and men. 

Until the blow of a gun-butt lays 
Him stunned and bleeding upon his face. 

A rope, a prayer, and an oak-tree near. 
And a score of hands to swing him clear. 

A grim black thing for the setting sun 
And the moon and the stars to look upon. 



PENURY 

Above his misered embers, gnarled and gray, 
With toil-twitched limbs he bends; around his hut, 
Want, like a hobbling hag, goes night and day. 
Scolding at windows and at doors tight-shut. 



DESERTED 

The old house leans upon a tree 
Like some old man upon a staff: 

The night wind in its ancient porch 
Sounds like a hollow laugh. 

lOO 



Madison Cawein 

The heaven is wrapped in flying clouds. 

As grandeur cloaks itself in gray: 
The starlight flitting in and out, 

Glints like a lanthorn ray. 

The dark is full of whispers. Now 

A fox-hound howls l and through the night, 

Like some old ghost frona out its grave. 
The moon comes misty white. 



Bert Lesion Taylor 

Bert Leston Taylor was born at Goshen, Massachusetts, 
November 13, 1866, and educated at the College of the City of 
New York. He had been engaged in journalism since 1895, 
conducting his column " A Line o' Type or Two " in the 
Chicago Daily News. He was the author of two novels as well 
as A Line-o'-Verse or Tiuo (1911) and Motley Measures (1913), 
a pair of delightful light verse collections. 

Taylor died of pneumonia March 19, 1921. 



CANOPUS 

When quacks with pills political would dope us, 
When politics absorbs the livelong day, 

I like to think about that star Canopus, 
So far, so far away. 

Greatest of visioned suns, they say who list 'em; 

To weigh it, science almost must despair. 
Its shell would hold our whole dinged solar system, 

Nor even know 'twas there. 
101 



Bert Leston Taylor 

When temporary chairmen utter speeches, 

And frenzied henchmen howl their battle hymns, 
My thoughts float out across the cosmic reaches 

To where Canopus swims. 
When men are calling names and making faces, 

And all the world's aj angle and ajar, 
I meditate on interstellar spaces 

And smoke a mild seegar. 

For after one has had about a week of 

The argument of friends as well as foes, 

A star that has no parallax to speak of 
Conduces to repose. 

William Vaughn Moody 

William Vaughn Moody was born at Spencer, Indiana, July 
I, 1869, and was educated at Harvard. After graduation, he 
spent the remaining eighteen years of his life in travel and in- 
tensive study— he taught, for eight years, at the University of 
Chicago — his death coming at the very height of his creative 
power. 

The Masque of Judgment, his first work, was published in 
1900. A richer and more representative collection appeared the 
year following; in Poems (1901) Moody effected that mingling 
of challenging lyricism and spiritual philosophy which becomes 
more and more insistent. (See Preface.) Throughout his 
career, and particularly in such lines as the hotly expostulating 
" On a Soldier Fallen in the Philippines " and the majestic, 
uncompleted " The Death of Eve," Moody successfully achieves 
the rare union of poet and preacher. " Gloucester Moors " is an 
outcry against the few exploiting the many; "The Quarry" 
and " An Ode in Time of Hesitation " are passionate with 
prophecy. His last, extended works have an epic quality which, 

102 



William Vaughn Moody 

with their too-crowded details and difficult diction, will eifectu- 
ally prevent them from ever becoming popular. But their im- 
portance will grow even as Moody's place in our literature will 
eventually be a higher one than that which has yet been ac- 
corded him. 

His prose play The Great Divide (1907) was strikingly suc- 
cessful when produced by Henry Miller. The Faith Healer 
(1909), another play in prose, because of its more exalted tone, 
did not win the favor of the theatre-going public. A complete 
edition of The Poems and Poetic Dramas of William Vaughn 
Moody was published in 1912 in two volumes. 

In the summer of 1909 Moody was stricken with the illness 
from which he never recovered. He died in October, 1910. 

FROM "JETSAM" 

Once at a simple turning of the way 
I met God walking; and although the dawn 
Was large behind Him, and the morning stars 
Circled and sang about his face as birds 
About the fieldward morning cottager, 
My coward heart said faintly, "Let us haste! 
Day grows and it is far to market-town." 
Once where I lay in darkness after fight. 
Sore smitten, thrilled a little thread of song 
Searching and searching all my muffled sense 
Until it shook sweet pangs through all my blood, 
And I beheld one globed in ghostly fire 
Singing, star-strong, her golden canticle; 
And her mouth sang, " The hosts of Hate roll past, 
A uance of dust-motes in the sliding sun; 
Love's battle comes on the wide wings of storm, 
From east to west one legion ! Wilt thou strive ? " 
103 



William Vaughn Moody 

Then, since the splendor of her sword-bright gaze 
Was heavy on me with yearning and with scorn, 
My sick heart muttered, " Yea, the little strife. 
Yet see, the grievous wounds! I fain would sleep." 

O heart, shalt thou not once be strong to go 
Where all sweet throats are calling, once be brave 
To slake with deed thy dumbness? Let us go 
The path her singing face looms low to point. 
Pendulous, blanched with longing, shedding flames 
Of silver on the brown grope of the flood; 
For all my spirit's soilure is put by 
And all my body's soilure, lacking now 
But the last lustral sacrament of death 
To make me clean for those near-searching eyes 
That question yonder whether all be well, 
And pause a little ere they dare rejoice. 

Question and be thou answered, passionate face! 
For I am worthy, worthy now at last 
After so long unworth; strong now at last 
To give myself to beauty and be saved. 

PANDORA'S SONG 

(From " The Fire-Bringer") 

I stood within the heart of God; 
It seemed a place I had known: 
(I was blood-sister to the clod, 
Blood-brother to the stone.) 
104 



William Vaughn Moody 

I found my love and labor there, 
My house, my raiment, meat and wine, 
My ancient rage, my old despair, — 
Yea, all things that were mine. 

I saw the spring and summer pass. 
The trees grow bare, and winter come; 
All was the same as once it was 
Upon my hills at home. 

Then suddenly in my own heart 
I felt God walk and gaze about; 
He spoke ; his words seemed held apart 
With gladness and with doubt. 

" Here is my meat and wine," He said, 
" My love, my toil, my ancient care; 
Here is my cloak, my book, my bed, 
And here my old despair. 

" Here are my seasons : winter, spring, 
Summer the same, and autumn spills 
The fruits I look for; everything 
As on my heavenly hills." 



ON A S'OLDIER FALLEN IN THE PHILIPPINES 

Streets of the roaring town, 
Hush for him; hush, be still! 
He comes, who was stricken down 
Doing the word of our wiU, 



William Vaughn Moody 

Hush! Let him have his state. 
Give him his soldier's crown, 
The grists of trade can wait 
Their grinding at the mill. 
But he cannot wait for his honor, now the trumpet has 

been blown. 
Wreathe pride now for his granite brow, lay love on 
his breast of stone. 

Toll! Let the great bells toll 

Till the clashing air is dim. 

Did we wrong this parted soul? 

We will make it up to him. 

Toll! Let him never guess 

What work we sent him to. 

Laurel, laurel, yes. 

He did what we bade him do. 
Praise, and never a whispered hint but the fight he 

fought was good; 
Never a word that the blood on his sword was his coun- 
try's own heart's-blood. 

A flag for a soldier's bier 
Who dies that his land may live; 
O banners, banners here. 
That he doubt not nor misgive! 
That he heed not from the tomb 
The evil days draw near 
When the nation robed in gloom 
With its faithless past shall strive, 
1 06 



William Vaughn Moody 

Let him never dream that his bullet's scream went wide 

of its island mark, 
Home to the heart of his darling land where she stumbled 

and sinned in the dark. 



George Sterling 

George Sterling was born at Sag Harbor, New York, De- 
cember I, 1869, and educated at various private schools in the 
Eastern States. He moved to the far West about 1895 and has 
lived in California ever since. 

Of Sterling's ten volumes of poetry, The Testimony of the 
Suns (1903), A Wine of Wizardry (1908) and The House of 
Orchids and Other Poems (1911) are the most characteristic. 
As their titles indicate, this is poetry of a flamboyant and 
rhetorical type; of luxuriant sentences and emotions decorated 
in "the grand manner." Yet Sterling has added a definite 
vigor to his ornate tropes and verbal prodigality. Nor is he 
always extravagant. His simpler verses, though not in his 
most familiar vein, are among his best. 



THE BLACK VULTURE 

Aloof upon the day's immeasured dome. 

He holds unshared the silence of the sky. 

Far down his bleak, relentless eyes descry 
The eagle's empire and the falcon's home — 
Far down, the galleons of sunset roam; 

His hazards on the sea of morning lie; 

Serene, he hears the broken tempest sigh 
Where cold sierras gleam like scattered foam. 
107 



George Sterling 

And least of air he holds the human swarm — 
Unwitting now that envious men prepare 
To make their dream and its fulfillment one, 
When, poised above the caldrons of the storm, 
Their hearts, contemptuous of death, shall dare 
His roads between the thunder and the sun. 



THE MASTER MARINER 

My grandsire sailed three years from home, 
And slew unmoved the sounding whale: 

Here on a windless beach I roam 
And watch far out the hardy sail. 

The lions of the surf that cry 

Upon this lion-colored shore 
On reefs of midnight met his eye: 

He knew their fangs as I their roar. 

My grandside sailed uncharted seas. 
And toll of all their leagues he took: 

I scan the shallow bays at ease. 
And tell their colors in a book. 

The anchor-chains his music made 

And wind in shrouds and running-gear: 

The thrush at dawn beguiles my glade. 

And once, 'tis said, I woke to hear. 

1 08 



George Sterling 

My grandsire in his ample fist 
The long harpoon upheld to men: 

Behold obedient to my wrist 
A grey gull's-feather for my pen! 

Upon my grandsire's leathern cheek 

Five zones their bitter bronze had set: 

Some day their hazards I will seek, 
I promise me at times. Not yet. 

I think my grandsire now would turn 

A mild but speculative eye 
On me, my pen and its concern. 

Then gaze again to sea — and sigh. 



Edwin Arlington Robinson 

Edwin Arlington Robinson was born December Z2, 1869, in 
the village of Head Tide, Maine. When he was still a child, 
the Robinson family moved to the nearby town of Gardiner, 
which figures prominently in Robinson's poetry as " Tilbury 
Town." In 1891 he entered Harvard College. A little col- 
lection of verse was privately printed in 1896 and the follow- 
ing year marked the appearance of his first representative work, 
The Children of the Night (1897). 

Somewhat later, he was struggling in various capacities 
to make a living in New York, five years passing before the 
publication of Captain Craig (1902). This fine piece of psy- 
chology, in the cryptic vein of Browning but in Robinson's own 
idiom, was brought to the attention of Theodore Roosevelt 
(then President of the United States), who became interested in 

109 



Edwin Arlington Robinson 

the work of the poet and, a few years later, offered hira a place 
in the New York Custom House. Robinson held this position 
from 1905 to 1910, leaving it the same year which marked the 
appearance of his most characteristic volume. The Toion donun 
the Rimer. Robinson's three books, up to this time, showed his 
clean, firmly-drawn quality; but, in spite of their excellences, 
they seem little more than a succession of preludes for the 
dynamic volume that was to establish him in the first rank of 
American poets. The Man Against the Sky, Robinson's fullest 
and most penetrating work, appeared in 191 6. (See Preface.) 

In all of these books there is manifest that searching for 
truth, the constant questioning, that takes the place of mere 
acceptance. As the work of a verbal portrait painter nothing, 
with the exception of some of Frost's pictures, has been pro- 
duced that is at Once so keen and so kindly; in the half-cynical, 
half-mystical etchings like " Cliff Klingenhagen," " Miniver 
Cheevy,'' " Richard Cory " — lines where Robinson's irony is in- 
extricably mixed with tenderness — his art is at its height. 

Technically, Robinson is as precise as he is dexterous; there is 
never a false image or a blurred line in any of his verses 
which, while adhering to the strictest models and executed 
according to traditional forms, are made fresh and surprising. 
It is interesting to observe how the smoothness of his rhymes, 
playing against the hard outlines of his verse, emphasizes the 
terse, epigrammatic vigor of poems like " The Gift of God," 
" The Field of Glory " and " The Master," one of the finest 
evocations of Lincoln which is, at the same time, a bitter com- 
mentary on the commercialism of the times and the " shop- 
man's test of age and worth." 

Robinson's blank verse is scarcely less individual. It is, in 
spite of a certain unblinking seriousness, always modern, al- 
ways packed with the instant. In " Ben Johnson Entertains a 
Man from Stratford " we have the clearest and most human 
portrait of Shakespeare ever attempted ; the lines run as fluently 
as good conversation, as inevitable as a perfect melody. In his 
two reanimations of the Arthurian legends. Merlin (1917) and 
Launcelot (1920), Robinson, shaming the tea-table idyls of 

IIO 



Edwin Arlington Robinson 

Tennyson, has colored the tale with somber reflections of the 
collapse of old orders, the darkness of an age in ashes. 

Although he is often accused of holding a negative attitude 
toward life, Robinson's philosophy is essentially positive; a 
dogged if never dogmatic desire for a deeper faith, a greater 
light. It is a philosophy expressed iii Captain Craig: 
. . . Take on yourself 
But your sincerity, and you take on 
Good promise for all climbing; fly for truth 
And hell shall have no storm to crush your flight, 
No laughter to vex down your loyalty. 

A collection of the poet's later verse, The Three Taverns 
(1920), reflects the same high standards of conciseness and crafts- 
manship. Robinson lives in Peterboro, New Hampshire, during 
the summer; his home in the winter is in Brooklyn, New York. 

MINIVER CHEEVY^ 

Miniver Cheevy, child of scorn, 

Grew lean while he assailed the seasons ; 

He wept that he was ever born, 
And he had reasons. 

Miniver loved the days of old 

When swords were bright and steeds were prancing ; 
The vision of a warrior bold 

Would set him dancing. 

Miniver sighed for what was not, 

And dreamed, and rested from his labors; 

He dreamed of Thebes and Camelot, 
And Priam's neighbors. 

1 Reprinted by permission of the publishers, Charles Scribner's 
Sons, from The Toiun donun the River by E. A. Robinson. 

Ill 



Edwin Arlington Robinson 

Miniver mourned the ripe renown 
That made so many a name so fragrant; 

He mourned Romance, now on the town, 
And Art, a vagrant. 

Miniver loved the Medici, 

Albeit he had never seen one; 
He would have sinned incessantly 

Could he have been one. 

Miniver cursed the commonplace 

And eyed a khaki suit with loathing; 
He missed the mediaeval grace 

Of iron clothing. 

Miniver scorned the gold he sought. 

But sore annoyed was he without it; 
Miniver thought, and thought, and thought. 

And thought about it. 

Miniver Cheevy, born too late. 

Scratched his head and kept on thinking; 
Miniver coughed, and called it fate, 

And kept on drinking. 

THE GIFT OF GOD ^ 

Blessed with a joy that only she 
Of all alive shall ever know. 
She wears a proud humility 
For what it was that willed it so, — 
^Reprinted by permission of the publishers, The Macmillan 
Company, from The Man Against the Sky by E. A. Robinson. 

112 



Edwin Arlington Robinson 

That her degree should be so great 
Among the favored of the Lord 
That she may scarcely bear the weight 
Of her bewildering reward. 

As one apart, immune, alone, 
Or featured for the shining ones. 
And like to none that she has known 
Of other women's other sons, — 
The firm fruition of her need, 
He shines anointed; and he blurs 
Her vision, till it seems indeed 
A sacrilege to call him hers. 

She fears a little for so much 
Of what is best, and hardly dares 
To think of him as one to touch 
With aches, indignities, and cares; 
She sees him rather at the goal, 
Still shining; and her dream foretells 
The proper shining of a soul 
Where nothing ordinary dwells. 

Perchance a canvass of the town 
Would find him far from flags and shouts. 
And leave him only the renown 
Of many smiles and many doubts; 
Perchance the crude and common tongue 
Would havoc strangely with his worth; 
But she, with innocence unwrung. 
Would read his name around the earth. 
113 



Edwin Arlington Robinson 

And others, knowing how this youth 
Would shine, if love could make him great, 
When caught and tortured for the truth 
Would only writhe and hesitate; 
While she, arranging for his days 
What centuries could not fulfil. 
Transmutes him with her faith and praise. 
And has him shining where she will. 

She crowns him with her gratefulness, 
And says again that life is good; 
And should the gift of God be less 
In him than in her motherhood. 
His fame, though vague, will not be small. 
As upward through her dream he fares, 
Half clouded with a crimson fall 
Of roses thrown on marble stairs. 



THE MASTER *i 

(^Lincoln as seen, presumably, by one of his contemporaries 
shortly after the Civil War) 

A flying word from here and there 
Had sown the name at which we sneered, 
But soon the name was everywhere, 
To be reviled and then revered: 

*See pages 51, 123, 232, 245, 252, 323. 

1 Reprinted by permission of the publishers, Charles Scribner's 
Sons, from The Town down the River by E. A. Robinson. 

114 



Edwin Arlington Robinson 

A presence to be loved and feared, 
We cannot hide it, or deny- 
That we, the gentlemen who jeered, 
May be forgotten by and by. 

He came when days were perilous 
And hearts of men were sore beguiled ; 
And having made his note of us. 
He pondered and was reconciled. 
Was ever master yet so mild 
As he, and so untamable? 
We doubted, even when he smiled, 
Not knowing what he knew so well. 

He knew that undeceiving fate 

Would shame us whom he served unsought; 

He knew that he must wince and wait — 

The jest of those for whom he fought; 

He knew devoutly what he thought 

Of us and of our ridicule; 

He knew that we must all be taught 

Like little children in a school. 

We gave a glamour to the task 
That he encountered and saw through. 
But little of us did he ask. 
And little did we ever do. 
And what appears if we review 
The season when we railed and chaffed? 
It is the face of one who knew 
That we were learning while we laughed. 
"5 



Edwin Arlington Robinson 

The face that in our vision feels 
Again the venom that we flung, 
Transfigured to the vsrorld reveals 
The vigilance to which we clung. 
Shrewd, hallowed, harassed, and among 
The mysteries that are untold. 
The face we see was never young, 
Nor could it ever have been old. 

For he, to whom we have applied 
Our shopman's test of age and worth, 
Was elemental when he died. 
As he was ancient at his birth: 
The saddest among kings of earth, 
Bowed with a galling crown, this man 
Met rancor with a cryptic mirth. 
Laconic — and Olympian. 

The love, the grandeur, and the fame 
Are bounded by the world alone; 
The calm, the smouldering, and the flame 
Of awful patience were his own : 
With him they are forever flown 
Past all our fond self-shadowings, 
Wherewith we cumber the Unknown 
As with inept Icarian wings. 

For we were not as other men: 
'Twas ours to soar and his to see. 
But we are coming down again. 
And we shall come down pleasantly; 
ii6 



Edwin Arlington Robinson 

Nor shall we longer disagree 
On what it is to be sublime, 
But flourish in our perigee 
And have one Titan at a time. 



AN OLD STORY ^ 

Strange that I did not know him then, 

That friend of mine! 
I did not even show him then 

One friendly sign; 

But cursed him for the ways he had 

To make me see 
My envy of the praise he had 

For praising me. 

I would have rid the earth of him 
Once, in my pride ! . . . 

I nev'Cr knew the worth of him 
Until he died. 



RICHARD CORY^ 

Whenever Richard Cory went down town, 
We people on the pavement looked at him : 

He was a gentleman from sole to crown, 
Clean favored, and imperially slim. 

^ Reprinted by permission of the publishers, Charles Scribner's 
Sons, from The Children of the Night. 

117 



Edwin Arlington Robinson 

And he was always quietly arrayed, 

And he was always human when he talked ; 

But still he fluttered pulses when he said, 

" Good-morning," and he glittered when he 
walked. 

And he was rich— yes, richer than a king, 
And admirably schooled in every grace: 

In fine, we thought that he was everything 
To make us wish that we were in his place. 

So on we worked, and waited for the light, 
And went without the meat, and cursed the 
bread ; 

And Richard Cory, one calm summer night, 
Went home and put a bullet through his head. 

VAIN GRATUITIES 

Never was there a man much uglier 

In the eyes of other women, or more grim: 

" The Lord has filled her chalice to the brim. 

So let us pray she's a philosopher," 

They said ; and there was more they said of her — 

Deeming it, after twenty years with him. 

No wonder that she kept her figure slim 

And always made you think of lavender. 

But she, demure as ever, and as fair. 
Almost, as they remembered her before 
She found him, would have laughed had she been there ; 
ii8 



Edwin Arlington Robinson 

And all they said would have been heard no more 
Than foam that washes on an island shore 
Where there are none to listen or to care. 



THE DARK HILLS 

Dark hills at evening in the west, 
Where sunset hovers like a sound 
Of golden horns that sang to rest 
Old bones of warriors under ground, 
Far now from all the bannered ways 
Where flash the legions of the sun. 
You fade — as if the last of days 
Were fading, and all wars were done. 



Edgar Lee Masters 

Edgar Lee Masters was born at Garnett, Kansas, August 23, 
1869, of old Puritan and pioneering stock. When he was still 
a boy, the family moved to Illinois, where, after desultory 
schooling, he studied law in his father's office at Lewiston. 
For a year he practised with his father and then went to 
Chicago, where he became a successful and prominent attorney. 

Before going to Chicago, Masters had composed a great quan- 
tity of verse in traditional forms on still more traditional 
themes; by the time he was twenty-four he had written about 
four hundred poems, revealing the result of wide reading and 
betraying the influence of Poe, Keats, Shelley and Swinburne. 
His work, previous to the publication of Spoon River Anthology, 
was derivative and undistinguished. In 1895 he wrote a blank 
verse play on Benedict Arnold. In 1898 he published A Book 
of Verses, a selection of some sixty of the early four hundred. 

119 



Edgar Lee Masters 

In 1902 Maximilian, another blank verse play, appeared, caus- 
ing no more comment than the others. Nothing daunted. 
Masters published several volumes in rapid succession (three 
books of poetry appearing, under various pseudonyms, between 
1905 and 1912), The New Star Chamber and Other Essays 
(1904), Blood of the Prophets .(1905), Althea, a play (1907), 
The Trifler, another play (1908). 

In 1914, Masters, at the suggestion of his friend William 
Marion Reedy, turned from his preoccupation with classic 
subjects and began to draw upon the life he knew for those 
concise records which have made him famous. Taking as his 
model The Greek Anthology, which Reedy had pressed upon 
him. Masters evolved Spoon River Anthology, that astonishing 
assemblage of over two hundred self -inscribed epitaphs, in 
which the dead of a middle Western town are supposed to 
have written the truth about themselves. Through these frank 
revelations, many of thera interrelated, the village is re- 
created for us; it lives again, unvarnished and typical, with 
all its intrigues, hypocrisies, feuds, martyrdoms and occasional 
exaltations. The crippling monotony of existence in a drab 
township, the defeat of ideals, the struggle toward higher goals 
— all is synthesized in these crowded pages. All moods and all 
manner of voices are heard here — even Masters's, who explains 
the reason for his medium and the selection of his form 
through "Petit, the Poet." 

The success of the volume was stupendous. (See Preface.) 
With every new attack (and its frankness continued to make 
^ fresh enemies) its readers increased; it was imitated, parodied, 
reviled as "a piece of yellow journalism;" hailed as "an 
American Comedie Humaine." Finally, after the storm of con- 
troversy, it has taken its place as a landmark in American 
literature. 

With Spoon River Anthology Masters arrived — and left. He 
went back to his first rhetorical style, resurrecting many of his 
earlier trifles, reprinting dull echoes of Tennyson, imitations of 
Shelley, archaic paraphrases in the manner of Swinburne. 

120 



Edgar Lee Masters 



Yet, though none of Masters's subsequent volumes can be com- 
pared to his masterpiece, all of them contain examples of the 
same straightforwardness, the stubborn searching for truth that 
intensified his best-known characterizations. 

Songs and Satires (1916) contains the startling "All Life in a 
Life " and the gravely moving " Silence." The Great Valley 
(1916) is packed with echoes and a growing dependence on 
Browning. In Toioard the Gulf (1918), the Browning influ- 
ence predominates, although there are such splendid individual 
monologues as " The World Saver," " St. Deseret " and 
"Front the Ages with a Smile." Starved Rock (1919) and 
Domesday Book (1920) are, like all Masters's later books, 
queerly assembled mixtures of good, bad and derivative verse. 
And yet, for all of this poet's borrowings, in spite of his 
cynicism and disillusion, Masters's work is a continual search- 
ing for some key to the mystery of truth, the mastery of life. 



PETIT, THE POET^ 

Seeds in a dry pod, tick, tick, tick. 
Tick, tick, tick, like mites in a quarrel — 
Faint iambics that the full breeze wakens — 
But the pine tree makes a symphony thereof. 
Triolets, villanelles, rondels, rondeaus, 
Ballades by the score with the same old thought: 
The snows and the roses of yesterday are vanished; 
And what is love but a rose that fades? 
Life all around me here in the village: 
Tragedy, comedy, valor and truth. 
Courage, constancy, heroism, failure — 
All in the loom, and oh what patterns! 
1 Reprinted by permission of the publishers. The Macmillan 
Company, from Spoon Ri-ver Anthology by Edgar Lee Masters. 

121 



Edgar Lee Masters 

Woodlands, meadows, streams and rivers — 

Blind to all of it all my life long. 

Triolets, villanelles, rondels, rondeaus. 

Seeds in a dry pod, tick, tick, tick, 

Tick, tick, tick, what little iambics, 

While Homer and Whitman roared in the pines! 



LUCINDA MATLOCK^ 

I went to the dances at Chandlerville, 

And played snap-out at Winchester. 

One time we changed partners, 

Driving home in the moonlight of middle June, 

And then I found Davis. 

We were married and lived together for seventy years. 

Enjoying, working, raising the twelve children. 

Eight of whom we lost 

Ere I had reached the age of sixty. 

I spun, I wove, I kept the house, I nursed the sick, 

I made the garden, and for holiday 

Rambled over the fields where sang the larks, 

And by Spoon River gathering many a shell, 

And many a flower and medicinal weed — 

Shouting to the wooded hills, singing to the green valleys. 

At ninety-six I had lived enough, that is all. 

And passed to a sweet -repose. 

What is this I hear of sorrow and weariness, 

1 Reprinted by permission of the publishers. The Macmillan 
Company, from Spoon River Anthology by Edgar Lee Masters. 

122 



Edgar Lee Masters 

Anger, discontent and drooping hopes? 
Degenerate sons and daughters, 
Life is too strong for you — 
It takes life to love Life. 

ANNE RUTLEDGE*! 

Out of me unworthy and unknown 

The vibrations of deathless music; 

" With malice toward none, with charity for all." 

Out of me the forgiveness of millions toward millions. 

And the beneficent face of a nation 

Shining with justice and truth. 

I am Anne Rutledge who sleep beneath these weeds. 

Beloved in life of Abraham Lincoln, 

Wedded to him, not through union, 

But through separation. 

Bloom forever, O Republic, 

From the dust of my bosom! 

SILENCE = 

I have known the silence of the stars and of the sea. 
And the silence of the city when it pauses, 
And the silence of a man and a maid, 
And the silence for which music alone finds the word, 

*See pages 51, 114, 232, 245, 252, 323. 

^ Reprinted by permission of the publishers, The IVTacmillan 
Company, from Spoon River Anthology by Edgar Lee Masters. 

2 Reprinted by permission of the publishers, The Macmillan 
Company, from Songs and Satires by Edgar Lee Masters. 

123 



Edgar Lee Masters 

And the silence of the woods before the winds of 

spring begin, 
And the silence of the sick 
When their eyes roam about the room. 
And I ask: For the depths 
Of what use is language? 
A beast of the field moans a few times 
When death takes its young. 
And we are voiceless in the presence of realities — 
We cannot speak. 

A curious boy asks an old soldier 
Sitting in front of the grocery store, 
" How did you lose your leg? " 
And the old soldier is struck with silence. 
Or his mind flies away 

Because he cannot concentrate it on Gettysburg. 
It comes back jocosely 
And he says, " A bear bit it off." 
And the boy wonders, while the old soldier 
Dumbly, feebly lives over 
The flashes of guns, the thunder of cannon, 
The shrieks of the slain. 
And himself lying on the ground, 
And the hospital surgeons, the knives, 
And the long days in bed. 
But if he could describe it all 
He would be an artist. 

But if he were an artist there would be deeper wounds 
Which he could not describe. 
124 



Edgar Lee Masters 

There is the silence of a great hatred, 

And the silence of a great love, 

And the silence of a deep peace of mind. 

And the silence of an embittered friendship, 

There is the silence of a spiritual crisis, 

Through which your soul, exquisitely tortured. 

Comes with visions not to be uttered 

Into a realm of higher life. 

And the silence of the gods who understand each 

other without speech. 
There is the silence of defeat. 
There is the silence of those unjustly punished; 
And the silence of the dying whose hand 
Suddenly grips yours. 

There is the silence between father and son. 
When the father cannot explain his life, 
Even though he be misunderstood for it. 

There is the silence that comes between husband and 

wife. 
There is the silence of those who have failed; 
And the vast silence that covers 
Broken nations and vanquished leaders. 
There is the silence of Lincoln, 
Thinking of the poverty of his youth. 
And the silence of Napoleon 
After Waterloo. 

And the silence of Jeanne d'Arc 
Saying amid the flames, " Blessed Jesus " — 
Revealing in two words all sorrow, all hope. 
125 



Edgar Lee Masters 

And there is the silence of age, 
Too full of wisdom for the tongue to utter it 
In words intelligible to those who have not lived 
The great range of life. 

And there is the silence of the dead. 

If we who are in life cannot speak 

Of profound experiences, 

Why do you marvel that the dead 

Do not tell you of death? 

Their silence shall be interpreted 

As we approach them. 

Stephen Crane 

Stephen Crane, whose literary career was one of the most 
meteoric in American letters, was born at Newark, New Jersey, 
November i, 1871. After taking a partial course at Lafayette 
College, he entered journalism at sixteen and, until the time of 
his death, was a reporter and writer of newspaper sketches. 
When he died, at the age of thirty, he had ten printed volumes 
standing to his credit, two more announced for publication, and 
two others which were appearing serially. 

Crane's most famous novel. The Red Badge of Courage 
(1895), was written when he was twenty-two years old. 
What is even more astonishing is the fact that this detailed 
description of blood and battlefields was written by a civilian 
far from the scene of conflict. This novel (Crane's second) 
was an instantaneous and international success. The Atlantic 
Monthly pronounced it " great enough to set a new fashion in 
literature"; H. G. Wells, speaking of its influence in England, 
said Crane was " the first expression of the opening mind or a 
new period . . a record of an intensity beyond all prece- 
dent." 

126 



Stephen Crane 

Crane's other books, although less powerful than The Red 
Badge of Courage, are scarcely less vivid. The Open Boat 
(1898) and The Monster (1899) are full of an intuitive vfis- 
dom and a sensitivity that caused Wells to exclaim "The man 
vyho can call these ' brilliant fragments ' would reproach Rodin 
for not ■ completing ' his fragments." 

At various periods in Crane's brief career, he experimented 
in verse, seeking to find new effects in unrhymed lines, a new 
acuteness of vision. The results were embodied in two volumes 
of unusual poetry, The Black Riders (1895) and IVar Is Kind 
(1899), lines that strangely anticipated the Imagists and the 
epigrammatic free verse that followed fifteen years later. 

Besides his many novels, short stories and poems, Crane was 
writing, at the time of his death, descriptions of the world's 
great battles for Lippincott's Magazine; his droll Whilommlle 
Stories for boys were appearing in Harper's Monthly and he 
was beginning a series of similar stories for girls. It is more 
than probable that this feverish energy of production aggra- 
vated the illness that caused Crane's death. He reached his 
refuge in the Black Forest only to die at the journey's end, 
June 5, 1900. 



I SAW A MAN 

I saw a man pursuing the horizon; 
Round and round they sped. 
I was disturbed at this; 
I accosted the man. 
" It is futile," I said, 
" You can never " — 

" You lie," he cried, 
And ran on. 

127 



Stephen Crane 

THE WAYFARER 

The wayfarer, 

Perceiving the pathway to truth, 

Was struck with astonishment. 

It was thickly grown with weeds. 

" Ha," he said, 

" I see that no one has passed here 

" In a long time." 

Later he saw that each weed 

Was a singular knife. 

" Well," he mumbled at last, 

" Doubtless there are other roads." 

HYMN 

A slant of sun on dull brown walls, 
A forgotten sky of bashful blue.' 

Toward God a mighty hymn, 
A song of collisions and cries. 
Rumbling wheels, hoof-beats, bells. 
Welcomes, farewells, love-calls, final moans, 
Voices of joy, idiocy, warning, despair. 
The unknown appeals of brutes. 
The chanting of flowers. 
The screams of cut trees, 
The senseless babble of hens and wise men — 
A cluttered incoherency that says to the stars: 
" O God, save us! " 
128 



Stephen Crane 

THE BLADES OF GRASS 

In Heaven, 

Some little blades of grass 

Stood before God. 

"What did you do?" 

Then all save one of the little blades 

Began eagerly to relate 

The merits of their lives. 

This one stayed a small way behind, 

Ashamed. 

Presently, God said, 

"And wrhat did you do?" 

The little blade answered, " Oh, my Lord, 

" Memory is bitter to me, 

For, if I did good deeds, 

I know not of them." 

Then God, in all his splendor. 

Arose from his throne. 

" Oh, best little blade of grass! " he said. 



Edwin Ford Piper 

Edwin Ford Piper was born at Auburn, Nebraska, February 8, 
1871, and literally grew up in the saddle. In 1893 he entered 
the University of Nebraska, from which he received an A.B. in 

1897 and A.M. in 1900. He studied at Harvard (1903-4), was 
one of the editors of The Kiote (a magazine published from 

1898 to 1903 in Lincoln, Nebraska), and, since 1905, has been 
an instructor of English at the State University of Iowa. 

129 



Edwin Ford Piper 

Piper's Barbed Wire and Other Poems (1918) is saturated 
with the color of his environment. His later poems are still 
more vivid and racy. " Sweetgrass Range" (with its self- 
acknowledged debt to Burns's "Rattlin' Roarin' Willie") and 
" Bindlestifl " are fresh evidences of this author's creative inter- 
est in ballads and folk-lore. 

BINDLESTIFF 

Oh, the lives of men, lives of men. 

In pattern-molds be run; 
But there's you, and me, and Bindlestiff — 

And remember Mary's Son. 

At dawn the hedges and the wheel-ruts ran 
Into a brightening sky. The grass bent low 
With shimmering dew, and many a late wild rose 
Unrolled the petals from its odorous heart 
While birds held tuneful gossip. Suddenly, 
Each bubbling trill and whistle hid away 
As from a hawk; the fragrant silence heard 
Only the loving stir of little leaves; 
Then a man's baritone broke roughly in : 

I've gnawed my crust of mouldy bread. 

Skimmed my mulligan stew; 
Laid beneath the barren hedge — 

Sleety night-winds blew. 

Slanting rain chills my bones. 

Sun bakes my skin; 
Rocky road for my limping feet. 

Door where I can't go in. 
130 



Edwin Ford Piper 

Above the hedgerow floated filmy smoke 

From the hidden singer's fire. Once more the voice: 

/ used to burn the mules with the whip 
When I Worked on the grading gang; 

But the boss was a crook, and he docked my pay — 
Some day that boss will hang. 

I used to live in a six by nine. 

Try to save my dough — 
It's a bellyful of the chaff of life, 

Feet that up and go. 

The mesh of leafy branches rustled loud, 

Into the road slid BindlestifE. You've seen 

The like of the traveller: gaunt humanity 

In stained and broken coat, with untrimmed hedge 

Of rusty beard and curling sunburnt hair; 

His hat, once white, a dull uncertain cone; 

His leathery hands and cheeks, his bright blue eyes 

That always see new faces and strange dogs; 

His mouth that laughs at life and at himself. 

Sometimes they shut you up in jail — 

Dark, and a filthy cell; 
I hope the fellows built them jails 

Find 'em down in hell. 

But up above, you can sleep outdoors — 

Feed you like a king ; 
You never have to saw no wood. 

Only job is sing. 
131 



Edwin Ford Piper 

The tones came mellower, as unevenly 

The tramp limped off trailing the hobo song: 



Good-bye, farewell to Omaha, 

K. C, and Denver, too; 
Put my foot on the flying freight. 

Going to ride her through. 

Bindlestiff topped a hillock, against the sky 
Showed stick and bundle with his extra shoes 
Jauntily dangling. Bird to bird once more 
Made low sweet answer; in the wild rose cups 
The bee found yellow meal; all softly moved 
The white and purple morning-glory bells 
As on the gently rustling hedgetop leaves 
The sun's face rested. Bindlestiff was gone. 

Oh, the lives of men, lives of men. 

In pattern-molds be run; 
But there's you, and me, and Bindlestiff — 

And remember Mary's Son. 



SWEETGRASS RANGE 

Come sell your pony, cowboy — 

Sell your pony to me; 
Braided bridle and your puncher saddle, 

And spend your money free. 
132 



Edwin Ford Piper 

" If I should sell my pony, 

And ride the range no more, 

Nail up my hat and my silver spurs 
Above my shanty door; 

" And let my door stand open w^ide 
To the snow and the rain and sun; 

And bury me under the green sweetgrass 
Where you hear the river run." 

As I came down the sweetgrass range 

And by the cabin door, 
I heard a singing in the early dusk 

Along the river shore; 

I heard a singing to the early stars. 
And the tune of a pony's feet. 

The joy of the riding singer 
I never shall forget. 



T. A. Daly 

Thomas Augustine Daly was born in Philadelphia, Penn- 
sylvania, May 28, 1871. He attended Villanova College and 
Fordham University (1889), leaving there at the end of his 
sophomore year to become a newspaper man. Since 1891 he has 
been on the staff of various Philadelphia journals, writing 
reviews, editorials, travel-notes and, most of all, running the 
columns in which his much-quoted verse originally appeared. 

Canzoni (1906) and Carmlna (1909) contain the best-known 
of Daly's varied dialect verse. Although he has written in 

133 



T. A. Daly 

half a dozen different idioms including " straight " English 
(vide Songs of fVedlock, 1916), his half-humorous, half- 
pathetic interpretations of the Irish and Italian immigrants are 
his forte. 

Seldom descending to caricature, Daly exhibits the features 
and foibles of his characters without exploiting them; even the 
lightest passages in McAroni Ballads (1919) are done with 
delicacy and a not too sentimental appreciation. 



THE SONG OF THE THRUSH 

Ah! the May was grand this raornin'! 

Shure, how could I feel forlorn in 

Such a land, when tree and flower tossed 

their kisses to the breeze? 
Could an Irish heart be quiet 
While the Spring was runnin' riot. 

An' the birds of free America were singin' in the trees? 
In the songs that they were singin' 
No familiar note was ringin', 

But I strove to imitate them an' I whistled like a lad. 
Oh, my heart was warm to love them 
For the very newness of them — 

For the ould songs that they helped me to forget — an' 
I was glad. 

So I mocked the feathered choir 
'To my hungry heart's desire. 
An' I gloried in the comradeship that made 

their joy my own. 
Till a new note sounded, stillin' 
All the rest. A thrush was trillin'! 
134 



T. A. Daly 

Ah! the thrush I left behind me in the fields about 
Athlone ! 
Where, upon the whitethorn swayin', 
He was minstrel of the Mayin', 
In my days of love an' laughter that the years have laid 
at rest; 
Here again his notes were ringin' ! 
But I'd lost the heart for singin' — 
Ah! the song I could not answer was the one I knew 
the best. 



MIA CARLOTTA 

Giuseppe, da barber, ees greata for " mash," 

He gotta da bigga, da blacka mustache. 

Good clo'es an' good styla an' playnta good cash. 

W'enevra Giuseppe ees walk on da street. 
Da peopla dey talka, "how nobby! how neat! 
How softa da handa, how smalla da feet." 

He raisa hees hat an' he shaka hees curls. 
An' smila weeth teetha so shiny like pearls; 
O! many da heart of da seelly j'oung girls 
He gotta. 
Yes, playnta he gotta — 
But notta 
Carlotta ! 
135 



T. A. Daly 

Giuseppe, da barber, he maka da eye. 
An' lika de steam engine puffa an' sigh, 
For catcha Carlotta w'en she ees go by. 

Carlotta she walka weeth nose in da air. 

An' look through Giuseppe weeth far-away stare, 

As eef she no see dere ees som'body dere. 

Giuseppe, da barber, he gotta da cash, 

He gotta da clo'es an' da bigga mustache. 

He gotta da seelly young girls for da " mash," 

But notta — 
You bat my life, notta — 

Carlotta. 

I gotta! 



BETWEEN TWO LOVES 

I gotta lov' for Angela, 

I lev' Carlotta, too. 
I no can marry both o' dem, 

So w'at I gona do? 

O ! Angela ees pretta girl. 
She gotta hair so black, so curl. 
An' teeth so white as anytheeng. 
An' O ! she gotta voice to seeng, 
Dat mak' your hearta feel eet must 
Jump up an' dance or eet weell bust. 
136 



T. A. Daly 

An' alia time she seeng, her eyes 
Dey smila like Italia's skies, 
An' makin' flirtin' looks at you — 
But dat ees all w'at she can do. 

Carlotta ees no gotta song, 
But she ees twice so big an' strong 
As Angela, an' she no look 
So beautiful — but she can cook. 
You oughta see her carry wood! 
I tal you w'at, eet do you good. 
When she ees be som'body's wife 
She worka hard, you bat my life! 
She never gattin' tired, too — 
But dat ees all w'at she can do. 

O ! my ! I weesh dat Angela 

Was strong for carry wood. 
Or else Carlotta gotta song 

An' looka pretta good. 
I gotta lov' for Angela, 

I lov' Carlotta, too. 
I no can marry both o' dem, 

So w'at I gona do? 



Paul Laurence Dunbar 

Paul Laurence Dunbar was born in 1872 at Dayton, Ohio, 
the son of negro slaves. He was, before and after he began 
to write his intrepretative verse, an elevator-boy. He tried 
newspaper work unsuccessfully and, in 1899, Dunbar was given 



Paul Laurence Dunbar 

a minor position in the Library of Congress at Washington, 
D. C. 

Although Dunbar wrote several volumes of short stories and 
two novels, he is most at home in his verse. And even here, 
his best work is not those straight, "literary English " pieces 
by which he set such store, but the racy rhymes written in negro 
dialect, alternately tender and mocking. Dunbar's first collec- 
tion. Lyrics of Lowly Life (1896), contains many of his most 
characteristic poems. In an introduction, in which mention 
was made of the oCtoroon Dumas and the great Russian poet 
Pushkin, who was a mulatto, William Dean Howells wrote, 
" So far as I could remember, Paul Dunbar was the only man 
of pure African blood and of American civilization to feel the 
negro life Esthetically and express it lyrically. . . His 
brilliant and unique achievement was to have studied the 
American negro objectively, and to have represented him as he 
found him — with humor, with sympathy, and yet with what the 
reader must instinctively feel to be entire truthfulness." 

Lyrics of the Hearthside (1899) and Lyrics of Love and 
Laughter (1903) are two other volumes full of folk-stuff. And 
though the final Lyrics of Sunshine and Shadow (1905) is less 
original, being crowded with echoes of all kinds of poetry from 
the songs of Robert Burns to the childhood rhymes of J. W. 
Riley, it contains a few of Dunbar's least-known but keenest 
interpretations. 

Dunbar died in the city of his birth, Dayton, Ohio, February 
lo, 1906. 

THE TURNING OF THE BABIES IN THE BED ^ 

Woman's sho' a cur'ous critter, an' dey ain't no doubtin' 

dat. 
She's a mess o' funny capahs f om huh shppahs to huh hat. 

^ From Lyrics of Love and Laughter. Copyright, 1903, by 
Dodd, Mead & Company. 

138 



Paul Laurence Dunbar 

Ef yo' tries to un'erstan' huh, an' yo' fails, des' up an' 

say: 
" D' ain't a bit o' use to try to un'erstan' a woman's way." 

I don' mean to be complainin', but I's jes' a-settin' down 
Some o' my own obserwations, w'en I cas' my eye eroun'. 
Ef yo' ax me fu' to prove it, I ken do it mighty fine, 
Fu' dey ain't no bettah 'zample den dis ve'y wife o' mine. 

In de ve'y hea't o' midnight, w'en I's sleepin' good an' 

soun', 
I kin hyeah a so't o' rustlin' an' somebody movin' 'roun'. 
An' I say, " Lize, whut yo' doin'?" But she frown 

an' shek huh haid, 
" Hesh yo' mouf, I's only tu'nin' of de chillun in de bed. 

" Don' yo' know a chile gits restless, layin' all de night 

one way? 
An' yo' got to kind o' 'range him sev'al times befo' 

de day? 
So de little necks won't worry, an' de little backs won't 

break ; 
Don' yo' t'ink 'cause chillun's chillun dey haint got no 

pain an' ache." 

So she shakes 'em, an' she twists 'em, an' she tu'ns 'em 

'roun' erbout, 
'Twell I don' see how de chillun evah keeps f'om 

hollahin' out. 

139 



Paul Laurence Dunbar 

Den she lif's 'em up head down'ards, so's dey won't git 

livah-grown, 
But dey snoozes des' ez peaceful ez a liza'd on a stone. 

Wen hit's mos' nigh time fu' wakin' on de dawn o' 

jedgement day, 
Seems lak I kin hyeah ol' Gab'iel lay his trumpet down 

an' say, 
" Who dat walkin' 'roun' so easy, down on earf ermong 

de dead?"— 
'T will be Lizy up a-tu'nin' of de chillun in de bed. 

A COQUETTE CONQUERED ^ 

Yes, my ha't's ez ha'd ez stone — 
Go 'way, Sam, an' lemme 'lone. 
No; I ain't gwine change my min'; 
Ain't gwine ma'y you — nuffin' de kin'. 

Phiny loves you true an' deah? 
Go ma'y Phiny; whut I keer? 
Oh, you needn't mou'n an' cry — 
I don't keer how soon you die. 

Got a present! Whut you got? 
Somef'n fu' de pan er pot! 
Huh! Yo' sass do sholy beat — 
Think I don't git 'nough to eat? 

1 From Lyrics of Loiuly Life. Copyright, 1896, by Dodd, 
Mead & Company. 

140 



Paul Laurence Dunbar 

Whut's dat un'neaf yo' coat? 
Looks des lak a little shoat. 
'Tain't no possum? Bless de Lamb! 
Yes, it is, you rascal, Sam! 

Gin it to me; whut you say? 
Ain't you sma't now ! Oh, go 'way ! 
Possum do look mighty nice; 
But you ax too big a price. 

Tell me, is you talkin' true, 
Dat's de gal's whut ma'ies you? 
Come back, Sam; now whah's you gwine? 
Co'se you knows dat possum's mine! 

DISCOVERED ^ 

Seen you down at chu'ch las' night, 

Nevah min'. Miss Lucy. 
What I mean? Oh, dat's all right, 

Nevah min'. Miss Lucy. 
You was sma't ez sma't could be. 
But you couldn't hide f'om me. 
Ain't I got two eyes to see! 

Nevah min', Miss Lucy. 

Guess you thought you's awful keen; 

Nevah min'. Miss Lucy. 
Evahthing you done, I seen; 

Nevah min', Miss Lucy. 

1 From Lyrics of Loialy Life. Copyright, 1896, by Dodd, 
Mead & Company. 

141 



Paul Laurence Dunbar 

Seen him tek yo' ahm jes' so, 
When he got outside de do' — 
Oh, I know dat man's yo' beau! 
Nevah min', Miss Lucy. 

Say now, honey, wha'd he say? — 
Nevah min', Miss Lucy. 

Keep yo' secrets — dat's yo' way — 
Nevah min', Miss Lucy. 

Won't tell me an' I'm yo' pal! 

I'm gwine tell his othah gal, — 

Know huh, too, huh name is Sal. 
Nevah min', Miss Lucy. 



Guy Wetmore Carryl 

Guy Wetmore Carryl, son of Charles Edward Carryl (see 
page 34), was born in New York City, March 4, 1873. He 
graduated from Columbia University in 1895, was editor of 
Munsey's Magazine, 1895-6, and, during the time he lived 
abroad (from 1897 to 1902), was the foreign representative 
of various American publications. 

As a writer of prose he was received with no little acclaim; 
his stories The Transgression of Andreia Vane (1902) and Zut 
and Other Parisians (1903) held the attention of a restless 
reading public. But it was as a writer of light verse that 
Carryl was preeminent. Inheriting a remarkable technical gift 
from his father, young Carryl soon surpassed him as well as all 
other rivals in the field of brilliantly rhymed, brilliantly turned 
burlesques. Although he wrote several serious poems (the best 
of which have been collected in the posthumously published 
The Garden of Years, 1904), Carryl's most characteristic work 
is to be found in his perversions of the parables of jEsop, 

142 



Guy Wetmore Carryl 



Fables for the Frivolous (1898), the topsy-turvy interpretations 
of old nursery rhymes, Mother Goose for Grownups (1900) and 
the fantastic variations on the fairy tales in Grimm Tales Made 
Gay (1903) — all of them with a surprising (and punning) 
Moral attached. 

This extraordinary versifier died, before reaching the height 
of his power, at the age of thirty-one, in the summer of 1904. 



HOW JACK FOUND THAT BEANS MAY GO 
BACK ON A CHAP 

Without the slightest basis 
For hypochondriasis 

A widow had forebodings which a cloud around her flung, 
And with expression cynical 
For half the day a clinical 

Thermometer she held beneath her tongue. 

Whene'er she read the papers 
She suffered from the vapors, 

At every tale of malady or accident she'd groan; 
In every new and smart disease, 
From housemaid's knee to heart disease. 

She recognized the symptoms as her own! 

She had a yearning chronic 
To try each novel. tonic, 

Elixir, panacea, lotion, opiate, and balm; 
And from a homeopathist 
Would change to an hydropathist. 

And back again, with stupefying calm! 
143 



Guy Wetmore Carryl 

She was nervous, cataleptic, 
And anemic, and dyspeptic: 

Though not convinced of apoplexy, yet she had her fears. 
She dwelt with force fanatical 
Upon a twinge rheumatical, 

And said she had a buzzing in her ears! 

Now all of this bemoaning 

And this grumbling and this groaning 

The mind of Jack, her son and heir, unconscionably bored. 
His heart completely hardening, 
He gave his time to gardening. 

For raising beans was something he adored. 

Each hour in accents morbid 
This limp maternal bore bid 

Her callous son affectionate and lachrymose good-bys. 
She never granted Jack a day 
Without some long " Alackaday ! " 

Accompanied by rolling of the eyes. 

But Jack, no panic showing, 

Just watched his beanstalk growing. 

And twined with tender fingers the tendrils up the pole. 
At all her words funereal 
He smiled a smile ethereal, 

Or sighed an absent-minded "Bless my soul!" 

That hollow-hearted creature 
Would never change a feature : 
No tear bedimmed his eye, however touching was her talk. 
144 



Guy Wetmore Carry! 

She never fussed or flurried him, 
The only thing that worried him 

Was when no bean-pods grew upon the stalk! 

But then he wabbled loosely 
His head, and wept profusely, 

And, taking out his handkerchief to mop away his tears, 
Exclaimed: " It hasn't got any! " 
He found this blow to botany 

Was sadder than were all his mother's fears. 

The Moral is that gardeners pine 
Whene'er no pods adorn the vine. 
Of all sad words experience gleans 
The saddest are: " It might have beans." 

(I did not make this up myself: 

'Twas in a book upon my shelf. 

It's witty, but I don't deny 

It's rather Whittier than I!) 



THE SYCOPHANTIC FOX AND THE 
GULLIBLE RAVEN 

A raven sat upon a tree, 

And not a word he spoke, for 
His beak contained a piece of Brie, 
Or, maybe, it was Roquefort. 

We'll make it any kind you please — 
At all events it was a cheese. 
145 



Guy Wetmore Carryl 

Beneath the tree's umbrageous limb 

A hungry fox sat smiling; 
He saw the raven watching him, 
And sjK)ke in words beguiling: 

" J' admire" said he, " ton beau plumage" 
(The which was simply persiflage.) 



Two things there are, no doubt you know. 

To which a fox is used: 
A rooster that is bound to crow, 
A crow that's bound to roost; 
And whichsoever he espies 
He teUs the most unblushing lies. 



" Sweet fowl," he said, " I understand 

You're more than merely natty, 
I hear you sing to beat the band 
And Adelina Patti. 

Pray render with your liquid tongue 
A bit from ' Gotterdanunerung.' " 



Tliis subtle qieedi w^as aimed to please 

The crow, and it succeeded; 
He thought no bird in all the trees 
Could sing as well as he did. 
In flattery completely doused. 
He gave the " Jewel Song " from " Faust" 
146 



Guy Wetmore Carryl 

But gravitation's law, of course, 
As Isaac Newton showed it, 
Exerted on the cheese its force. 

And elsewhere soon bestowed it. 
In fact, there is no need to tell 
What happened when to earth it fell. 

I blush to add that when the bird 

Took in the situation 
He said one brief, emphatic word, 
Unfit for publication. 

The fox was greatly startled, but 
He only sighed and answered " Tut." 

THE MORAL is: A fox is bound 

To be a shameless sinner. 
And also: When the cheese comes round 
You know it's after dinner. 

But (what is only known to few) 
The fox is after dinner, too. 



HOW A CAT WAS ANNOYED AND A POET 
WAS BOOTED 

A poet had a cat. 

There is nothing odd in that — 

(I might make a little pun about the Mews!) 
But what is really more 
Remarkable, she wore 

A pair of pointed patent-leather shoes, 
147 



Guy Wetmore Carry! 

And I doubt me greatly whether 

E'er you heard the like of that: 
Pointed shoes of patent-leather 
On a cat! 

His time he used to pass 
Writing sonnets, on the grass — 

(I might say something good on pen and sward!) 
While the cat sat near at hand, 
Trying hard to understand 

The poems he occasionally roared. 
(I myself possess a feline, 

But when poetry I roar 
He is sure to make a bee-line 
For the door.) 

The poet, cent by cent. 
All his patrimony spent — 

(I might tell how he went from verse to worse!) 
Till the cat was sure she could, 
By advising, do him good. 

So addressed him in a manner that was terse: 
" We are bound toward the scuppers, 

And the time has come to act. 
Or we'll both be on our uppers 
For a fact!" 

On her boot she fixed her eye. 
But the boot made no reply — • 

(I might say: " Couldn't speak to save its sole J ") 
148 



Guy Wetmore Carryl 

And the foolish bard, instead 
Of responding, only read 

A verse that wasn't bad upon the whole. 
And it pleased the cat so greatly. 

Though she knew not what it meant, 
That I'll quote approximately 
How it went: — 



" If I should live to be 

The last leaf upon the tree " — 

(I might put in: "I think I'd just as leaf!") 
" Let them smile, as I do now, 
At the old forsaken bough "• — ■ 

Well, he'd plagiarized it bodily, in brief! 
But that cat of simple breeding 

Couldn't read the lines between. 
So she took it to a leading 
Magazine. 

She was jarred and very sore 
When they showed her to the door. 

(I might hit off the door that was a jar!) 
To the spot she swift returned 
Where the poet sighed and yearned. 

And she told him that he'd gone a little far. 
" Your performance with this rhyme has 

Made me absolutely sick," 
She remarked. " I think the time has 
Come to kick! " 
149 



Guy JJetmore Carryl 

I could fill up half the page 
With descriptions of her rage — 

(I might say that she went a bit too fur!) 
When he smiled and murmured : " Shoo ! " 
" There is one thing I can do ! " 

She answered with a wrathful kind of purr. 
" You may shoo me, an' it suit j'ou, 

But I feel my conscience bid 
Me, as tit for tat, to boot 5 ou ! " 
(A\Tiich she did.) 

The Moral of the plot 

(Though I say it, as should not!) 

Is: An editor is difficult to suit. 
But again there're other times 
When the man who fashions rhjTnes 

Is a rascal, and a bully one to boot! 



H. H. Knibbs 

Harrj' Herbert Knibbs was born at Niagara Falls, October 24, 
1874. After a desultory schooling, he attended Harvard for 
three years when he was thirty-four. " Somebody said I took 
honors in English," says Knibbs, " but I never saw them." He 
wrote his first book, Lost Farm Camp, a novel, as a class 
exercise. 

Half a dozen volumes followed, Overland Red (191+) and 
Tang of Life {1917) being the most popular. In 1911, Knibbs 
settled in Lost Angeles, California, where he has lived ever 
since. 

In Riders of the Stars (1916) and Songs of the Trail (1930), 
Knibbs carries on the tradition of Bret Harte and the Pike 

150 



H. H. Knibbs 

County Ballads. High-hearted verse this is, with more than 
an occasional flash of poetry. To the typical Western breezi- 
ness, Knibbs adds a wider whimsicality, a rough-shod but 
nimble imagination. 



THE VALLEY THAT GOD FORGOT 

Out in the desert spaces, edged by a hazy blue, 
Davison sought the faces of the long-lost friends he knew : 

They were there, in the distance dreaming 

Their dreams that were worn and old; 

They were there, to his frenzied seeming. 

Still burrowing down for gold. 

Davison's face was leather; his mouth was a swollen blot. 
His mind was a floating feather, in The Valley That 
God Forgot; 

Wild as a dog gone loco. 

Or sullen or meek, by turns. 

He mumbled a " Poco ! Poco ! " 

And whispered of pools and ferns. 

Gold! Why his, for the finding! But water was never 

found, 
Save in deep caverns winding miles through the under- 
ground : 
Cool, far, shadowy places 
Edged by the mirrored trees. 
When — Davison saw the faces! 
And fear let loose his knees. 
151 



H. H. Knibbs 

There was Shorty who owed him money, and Billing 

who bossed the crowd ; 
And Steve whom the boys called " Sunny," and Collins 
who talked so loud : 
Miguel with the handsome daughter, 
And the rustler, Ed McCray; 
Five — and they begged for water, 
And offered him gold, in pay. 

Gold? It was never cheaper. And Davison shook his 

head: 
" The price of a drink is steeper out here than in town," 
he said. 
He laughed as they mouthed and muttered 
Through lips that were cracked and dried; 
The pulse in his ear-drum fluttered : 
" I'm through with the game! " he cried. 

" I'm through ! " And he knelt and fumbled the cap of 

his dry canteen 
Then, rising, he swayed and stumbled into a black ravine : 

His ghostly comrades followed. 

For Davison's end was near. 

And a shallow grave they hollowed, 

When up from it, cool and clear 

Bubbled the water — hidden a pick-stroke beneath the 

sand ; 
Davison, phantom-ridden, scooped with a shaking 

hand . . . 

152 



H. H. Knibbs 

Davison swears they made it, 
The Well where we drank to-day. 
Davison's game? He played it 
And won — so the town-folk say: 

Called it, The Morning-Glory — near those abandoned 

stamps, 
And Davison's crazy story was told in a hundred camps: 

Time and the times have tamed it, 

His yarn — and this desert spot. 

But I'm strong for the man who named it. 

The Valley That God Forgot. 



ROLL A ROCK DOWN 

Oh, out in the West where the riders are ready. 
They sing an old song and they tell an old tale, 

And its moral is plain: Take it easy, go steady, 
While riding a horse on the Malibu Trail. 

It's a high, rocky trail with its switch-backs and doubles, 

It has no beginning and never an end : 
It's risky and rough and it's plumb full of troubles. 

From Shifty — that's shale — up to Powder Cut Bend. 

Old-timers will tell you the rangers who made it. 
Sang " Roll A Rock Down," with a stiff upper lip, 

And cussed all creation, but managed to grade it ; 
With a thousand-foot drop if a pony should. slip. 
153 



H. H. Knibbs 

Oh, the day it was wet and the sky it was cloudy, 
The trail was as slick as an oil-rigger's pants, 

When Ranger McCabe on his pony. Old Rowdy, 
Came ridin' where walkin' was takin' a chance. 

" Oh, Roll A Rock Down ! " picks and shovels was clangin'. 
And Rowdy a-steppin' that careful and light, 

When the edge it gave way and McCabe was left hangin' 
Clean over the rim — with no bottom in sight. 

I shook out a loop — ^bein' crowded for throwin' ; 

I flipped a fair noose for a rope that was wet: 
It caught just as Mac lost his holt and was goin'. 

And burned through my fingers: it's burnin' them yet. 

For Ranger McCabe never knuckled to danger; 

My pardner in camp, on the trail, or in town: 
And he slid into glory, a true forest-ranger, 

With: " Hell! I'm a-goin'! Just roll a rock down." 

So, roll a rock down where a ranger is sleepin' 
Aside of his horse below Powder Cut Bend: 

I ride and I look where the shadows are creepin'. 
And roll a rock down — for McCabe was my friend. 

I've sung you my song and I've told you my story, 
And all that I ask when I'm done with the show, 

Is, roll a rock down when I slide into glory. 
And say that I went like a ranger should go. 
154 



H. H. Knibbs 

THE TRAIL-MAKERS 
North and west along the coast among the misty islands, 

Sullen in the grip of night and smiling in the day: 
Nunivak and Akutan, with Nome against the highlands, 
On we drove with plated prow agleam with frozen 
spray. 

Loud we sang adventuring and lustily we jested; 

Quarreled, fought, and then forgot the taunt, the 
blow, the jeers; 
Named a friend and clasped a hand — a compact sealed, 
attested; 
Shared tobacco, yarns, and drink, and planned sur- 
passing years. 

Then — the snow that locked the trail . where famine's 
shadow followed 
Out across the blinding white and through the stab- 
bing cold. 
Past tents along the tundra over faces blotched and 
hollowed ; 
Toothless mouths that babbled foolish songs of hidden 
gold. 

Wisdom, lacking sinews for the toil, gave overytrying; 
Fools, with thews of iron, blundered on/t'irf^^'on the 
fight; > 

Weaklings drifted homeward; elj# t\fi tarried — ^worse 
than dying — 
With the painted lips and wastrels on the edges of 
the night. 

155 



H. H. Knibbs 

Berries of the saskatoon were ripening and falling; 
Flowers decked the barren with its timber scant and 
low; 
All along the river-trail were many voices calling, 
And e'en the whimpering Malemutes they heard — and 
whined to go. 

Eyelids seared with fire and ice and frosted parka-edges; 

Firelight like a spray of blood on faces lean and brown ; 
Shifting shadows of the pines across our loaded sledges, 

And far behind the fading trail, the lights and lures 
of town. 

So we played the bitter game nor asked for praise or 
pity: 
Wind and wolf they found the bones that blazed out 
lonely trails. . . . 
Where a dozen shacks were set, to-day there blooms a 
city; 
Now where once was emptj' blue, there pass a thou- 
sand sails. 

Scarce a peak that does not mark the grave of those who 
perished 
Nameless, lost to lips of men who followed, gleaning 
fame 
From the soundless triumph of adventurers who cher- 
ished 
Naught above the glory of a chance to play the game. 
156 



H. H. Knibbs 

Half the toil — and we had won to wealth in other 
station ; 
Rusted out as useless ere our worth was tried and 
known. 
But the Hand that made us caught us up and hewed a 
nation 
From the frozen fastness that so long was His alone. 

Loud we sang adventuring and lustily we jested; 

Quarreled, fought, and then forgot the taunt, the blow, 
the jeers; 
Sinned and slaved and vanished — we, the giant-men who 
wrested 
Truth from out a dream wherein we planned surpassing 
years. 



Anna Hempstead Branch 

Anna Hempstead Branch was born at New London, Con- 
necticut. She graduated from Smith College in 1897 and has 
devoted herself to literature ever since. 

Her two chief volumes, The Shoes That Danced (1905) and 
Rose of the Wind (1910), show a singer who is less fanciful 
than philosophic. Often, indeed, she weighs down her sim- 
ple melodies with a heavy intellectuality, but, even more often, 
she attains a high level of lyricism. Her lines are admirably 
condensed, rich in personal value as well as poetic revelation; 
they maintain a high and austere level. A typical poem is 
" The Monk in the Kitchen,'' which, with its spiritual loveliness 
and verbal felicity, is a celebration of cleanness that gives 
order an almost mystical nobility. 

157 



Anna Hempstead Branch 

THE MONK IN THE KITCHEN 

I 

Order is a lovely thing; 

On disarray it lays its wing, 

Teaching simplicity to sing. 

It has a meek and lowly grace, 

Quiet as a nun's face. 

Lo — I will have thee in this place! 

Tranquil well of deep delight, 

All things that shine through thee appear 

As stones through water, sweetly clear. 

Thou clarity. 

That with angelic charity 

Revealest beauty where thou art, 

Spread thyself like a clean pool. 

Then all the things that in thee are. 

Shall seem more spiritual and fair. 

Reflection from serener air — 

Sunken shapes of many a star 

In the high heavens set afar. 

II 

Ye stolid, homely, visible things, 
Above you all brood glorious wings 
Of your deep entities, set high, 
Like slow moons in a hidden sky. 
But you, their likenesses, are spent 
Upon another element. 
Truly ye are but seemings — 
The shadowy cast-off gleamings 
158 



Anna Hempstead Branch 

Of bright solidities. Ye seem 
Soft as water, vague as dream; 
Image, cast in a shifting stream. 

Ill 

What are ye? 

I know not. 

Brazen pan and iron pot, 

Yellow brick and gray flag-stone 

That my feet have trod upon — 

Ye seem to me 

Vessels of bright mystery. 

For ye do bear a shape, and so 

Though ye were made by man, I know 

An inner Spirit also made. 

And ye his breathings have obeyed. 

IV 

Shape, the strong and awful Spirit, 
Laid his ancient hand on you. 
He waste chaos doth inherit; 
He can alter and subdue. 
Verily, he doth lift up 
Matter, like a sacred cup. 
Into deep substance he reached, and lo 
Where ye were not, ye were ; and so 
Out of useless nothing, ye 
Groaned and laughed and came to be. 
And I use you, as I can, 
Wonderful uses, made for man. 
Iron pot and brazen pan. 
159 



Anna Hempstead Branch 

V 

What are ye? 

I know not; 

Nor what I really do 

When I move and govern you. 

There is no small work unto God. 

He required of us greatness; 

Of his least creature 

A high angelic nature, 

Stature superb and bright completeness. 

He sets to us no humble duty. 

Each act that he would have us do 

Is haloed round with strangest beauty; 

Terrific deeds and cosmic tasks 

Of his plainest child he asks. 

When I polish the brazen pan 

I hear a creature laugh afar 

In the gardens of a star, 

And from his burning presence run 

Flaming wheels of many a sun. 

Whoever makes a thing more bright. 

He is an angel of all light. 

When I cleanse this earthen floor 

My spirit leaps to see 

Bright garments trailing over it, 

A cleanness made by me. 

Purger of all men's thoughts and ways, 

With labor do I sound Thy praise. 

My work is done for Thee. 

i6o 



Anna Hempstead Branch 

Whoever makes a thing more bright, 
He is an angel of all light. 
Therefore let me spread abroad 
The beautiful cleanness of my God. 



VI 

One time in the cool of dawn 

Angels came and worked with me. 

The air was soft with many a wing. 

They laughed amid my solitude 

And cast bright looks on everything. 

Sweetly of me did they ask 

That they might do my common task. 

And all were beautiful — but one 

With garments whiter than the sun 

Had such a face 

Of deep, remembered grace; 

That when I saw I cried — " Thou art 

The great Blood-Brother of my heart. 

Where have I seen thee? " — And he said, 

" When we are dancing round God's throne. 

How often thou art there. 

Beauties from thy hands have flown 

Like white doves wheeling in mid air. 

Nay — thy soul remembers not? 

Work on, and cleanse thy iron pot." 

VII 

What are we? I know not. 
i6i 



Anna Hempstead Branch 



WHILE LOVELINESS GOES BY 

Sometimes when all the world seems grey and dun 
And nothing beautiful, a voice will cry, 
" Look out, look out! Angels are drawing nigh! " 
Then my slow burdens leave me one by one. 
And swiftly does my heart arise and run 
Even like a child while loveliness goes by — 
And common folk seem children of the sky. 
And common things seem shaped of the sun. 
Oh, pitiful! that I who love them, must 
So soon perceive their shining garments fade! 
And slowly, slowly, from my eyes of trust 
Their flaming banners sink into a shade! 
While this earth's sunshine seems the golden dust 
Slow settling from that radiant cavalcade. 



Amy Lowell 

Amy Lowell was born in Brookline, Massachusetts, February 
9, 1874, of a long line of noted publicists and poets, the first 
colonist (a Percival Lowell) arriving in Newburyport in 1637. 
James Russell Lowell was a cousin of her grandfather; Abbott 
Lawrence, her mother's father, was minister to England ; and 
Abbott Lawrence Lowell, her brother, is president of Harvard 
University. 

Miss Lowell obtained her early education through private 
tuition and travel abroad. These European journeys were the 
background upon which much of Miss Lowell's later work is 
unconsciously woven; her visits to France, Egypt, Turkey and 

162 



Amy Lowell 

Greece bore fruit, many years later, in the exotic colors of her 
verse. As a young girl, she had vague aspirations toward 
being a writer; but it was not until 190Z, when she was twenty- 
eight years old, that she definitely determined to be a poet. 
For eight years she served a rigorous and solitary apprentice- 
ship, reading the classics of all schools and countries, studying 
the technique of verse, exercising her verbal power — but never 
attempting to publish a single line. In 1910 her first verse was 
printed in The Atlantic Monthly; two years later her first book 
appeared. 

This volume, A Dome of Many-colored Glass (1912), was a 
strangely unpromising first book. The subjects were as conven- 
tional as the treatment of them; the influence of Keats and Ten- 
nyson was evident; the tone was soft and sentimental, almost 
without a trace of personality. It was a queer prologue to the 
vivid Sijsord Blades and Poppy Seed (1914), which marked 
not only an extraordinary advance but a totally new individu- 
ality. This second volume contained many distinctive poems 
written in the usual forms, a score of pictorial pieces illus- 
trating Miss Lowell's identification with the Imagists (see 
Preface) and, possibly most important from a technical stand- 
point, the first appearance in English of " polyphonic prose." 
Of this extremely flexible form, which has only begun to be 
exploited, Miss Lowell, in an essay on John Gould Fletcher, has 
written, " ' Polyphonic ' means ' many-voiced,' and the form is 
so-called because it makes use of the ' voices ' of poetry, 
namely: meter, ^vers libre, assonance, alliteration, rhyme and 
return. It employs every form of rhythm, even prose rhythm at 
times." 

It was because of such experiments in form and technique 
that Miss Lowell first attracted attention and is still best 
known. But, beneath her preoccupation with theories and nov- 
elty of utterance, one listens to the skilled story-teller, to the 
designer of arabesques, to the narrator who [vide such poems 
as "A Lady," "Vintage" and the later "Bronze Horses") 
revivifies history with creative excitement. 

163 



Amy Lowell 

Men, Women and Ghosts (1916) brims with this contagious 
vitality; it is richer in variety than its predecessors, swifter in 
movement, surer in artistry. It is, in common with all of Miss 
Lowell's work, best in its portrayal of the colors and sounds of 
physical rather than the reactions of emotional experience. 
She is, preeminently, the poet of the external world ; her pic- 
tures are as "hard and clear" as the most uncompromising 
Imagist could desire. The colors with which her works are 
studded seem like bits of bright enamel ; every leaf and flower 
has a lacquered brilliance. To compensate for the lack of per- 
sonal warmth. Miss Lowell feverishly agitafes all she touches; 
nothing remains quiescent. Whether she writes about a fruit 
shop, or a flower-garden in Roxbury, or a window-full of red 
slippers, or a string quartet, or a Japanese print — everything 
flashes, leaps, startles, spins and burns with an almost savage 
intensity; a dynamic speed dizzies one. Here motion frequently 
takes the place of emotion. 

In Can Grande's Castle (1918), Miss Lowell achieves a 
broader line; the teller of stories, the bizarre decorator and 
the experimentalist are finally fused. The poems in this volume 
are only four in number — four polyphonic prose-poems of almost 
epic length, but they are extraordinarily varied in music, 
sweeping in their sense of magnitude and time. Pictures of the 
Floating World (1919) which followed is, in many ways. Miss 
Lowell's most personal revelation. Although*there are several 
pages devoted to the merely dazzling and grotesque, most of 
these poems are in a quieter key; a new restraint gives unsus- 
pected overtones to stanzas that have much in common with 
the earlier "Patterns" where the narrative, the character and 
the thing observed are inextricably knit. 

Besides Miss Lowell's original poetry, she has made many 
studies in Japanese and Chinese poetry reflecting, even in her 
own work, their Oriental colors and contours. She has also 
written two volumes of critical essays: Six French Poets (1915) 
and Tendencies in Modern American Poetry (1917), both of 
them invaluable aids to the student of contemporary literature. 

164 



Amy Lowell 

SOLITAIRE 1 

When night drifts along the streets of the city, 

And sifts down between the uneven roofs, 

My mind begins to peek and peer. 

It plays at ball in odd, blue Chinese gardens, 

And shakes wrought dice-cups in Pagan temples 

Amid the broken flutings of white pillars. 

It dances with purple and yellow crocuses in its hair. 

And its feet shine as they flutter over drenched grasses. 

How light and laughing my mind is. 

When all good folk have put out their bedroom candles. 

And the city is still. 



MEETING-HOUSE HILL 

I must be mad, or very tired. 

When the curve of a blue bay beyond a railroad track 

Is shrill and sweet to me like the sudden springing of 

a tune. 
And the sight of a white church above thin trees in a 

city square 
Amazes my eyes as though it were the Parthenon. 
Clear, reticent, superbly final. 
With the pillars of its portico refined to a cautious 

elegance, 

^ Reprinted by permission of the publishers, The Macmillan 
Company, from Pictures of lite Floating IVorld by Amy Lowell. 

165 



Amy Lowell 

It dominates the weak trees, 

And the shot of its spire 

Is cool and candid, 

Rising into an unresisting sky. 

Strange meeting-house 

Pausing a moment upon a squalid hill-top. 

I watch the spire sweeping the sky, 

I am dizzy with the movement of the sky; 

I might be watching a mast 

With its royals set full 

Straining before a two-reef breeze. 

I might be sighting a tea-clipper, 

Tacking into the blue bay. 

Just back from Canton 

With her hold full of green and blue porcelain 

And a Chinese coolie leaning over the rail 

Gazing at the white spire 

With dull, sea-spent eyes. 



A LADY 1 

You are beautiful and faded, 
Like an old opera tune 
Played upon a harpsichord; 
Or like the sun-flooded silks 
Of an eighteenth-century boudoir. 

1 Reprinted by permission of the publishers, The Macmillan 
Company, from Sword Blades and Poppy Seed by Amy Lowell. 

166 



Amy Lowell 

In your eyes 

Smoulder the fallen roses of outlived minutes, 

And the perfume of your soul 

Is vague and suffusing, 

With the pungence of sealed spice-jars. 

Your half-tones delight me. 

And I grow mad with gazing 

At your blent colors. 

My vigor is a new-minted penny, 
Which I cast at your feet. 
Gather it up from the dust 
That its sparkle may amuse you. 

FREE FANTASIA ON JAPANESE THEMES ^ 

All the afternoon there has been a chirping of birds, 
And the sun lies warm and still on the western sides 

of swollen branches, 
There is no wind; 
Even the little twigs at the ends of the branches 

do not move, 
And the needles of the pines are solid 
Bands of inarticulated blackness 
Against the blue-white sky. 
Still, but alert; 

And my heart is still and alert, 
Passive with sunshine, 
Avid of adventure. 
^ Reprinted by permission of the publishers. The Macmillan 
Company, from Pictures oj the Floating World by Amy Lowell. 

167 



Amy Lowell 

I would experience new emotions, 

Submit to strange enchantments, 

Bend to influences 

Bizarre, exotic, 

Fresh with burgeoning. 

I would climb a sacred mountain. 

Struggle with other pilgrims up a steep path through 

pine-trees, 
Above to the smooth, treeless slopes. 
And prostrate myself before a painted shrine. 
Beating my hands upon the hot earth. 
Quieting my eyes upon the distant sparkle 
Of the faint spring sea. 

I would recline upon a balcony 
In purple curving folds of silk. 
And my dress should be silvered with a pattern 
Of butterflies and swallows, 
And the black band of my obi 
Should flash with gold circular threads. 
And glitter when I moved. 
I would lean against the railing 
While you sang to me of wars 
Past and to come — 
Sang, and played the samisen. 
Perhaps I would beat a little hand drum 
In time to your singing; 

Perhaps I would only watch the play of light 
Upon the hilt of your two swords. 
i68 



Amy Lowell 

I would sit in a covered boat, 
Rocking slowly to the narrow waves of a river, 
While above us, an arc of moving lanterns, 
Curved a bridge, 
A hiss of gold 
Blooming out of darkness. 
Rockets exploded, 

And died in a soft dripping of colored stars. 
We would float between the high trestles, 
And drift away from other boats. 
Until the rockets flared soundless, 
And their falling stars hung silent in the sky, 
Like wistaria clusters above the ancient entrance of 
a temple. 

I would anything 
Rather than this cold paper; 

With outside, the quiet sun on the sides of burgeon- 
ing branches, 
And inside, only my books. 

MADONNA OF THE EVENING FLOWERS ^ 

All day long I have been working. 

Now I am tired. 

I call: "Where are you?" 

But there is only the oak tree rustling in the wind. 

The house is very quiet. 

The sun shines in on your books, 

1 Reprinted by permissfon of the publishers, The Macmillan 
Company, from Pictures of the Floating World by Amy Lowell, 

i6g 



Amy Lowell 

On your scissors and thimble just put down, 

But you are not there. 

Suddenly I am lonely: 

Where are you? 

I go about searching. 

Then I see you, 

Standing under a spire of pale blue larkspur, 

With a basket of roses on your arm. 

You are cool, like silver, 

And you smile. 

I think the Canterbury bells are playing little tunes. 

You tell me that the peonies need spraying. 

That the columbines have overrun all bounds. 

That the pyrus japonica should be cut back and 

rounded. 
You tell me these things. 
But I look at you, heart of silver. 
White heart-flame of polished silver, 
Burning beneath the blue steeples of the larkspur, 
And I long to kneel instantly at your feet. 
While all about us peal the loud, sweet Te Deums 

of the Canterbury bells. 

WIND AND SILVER 

Greatly shining. 

The Autumn moon floats in the thin sky; 

And the fish-ponds shake their backs and flash their 

dragon scales 
As she passes over them. 
170 



Ridgely Torrence 

(Frederic) Ridgely Torrence was born at Xenia, Ohio, 
November 27, 1875, and was educated at Miami and Princeton 
University. For several years he was librarian of the Astor 
Library in New York City (1897-1901) and has been on several 
editorial staffs since then. 

His first^ volume, The House of a Hundred Lights (1900), 
bears the grave subtitle " A Psalm of Experience after Reading 
a Couplet of Bidpai " and is a half-whimsical, half-searching 
hodge-podge of philosophy, love lyrics, artlessness and impu- 
dence. The influence of Omar Khayyam and Richard Hovey 
is obvious but not too dominant; Torrence saves himself on 
the very verge of sentimentality and rhetoric by a chuckle, an 
adroit right-about-face. 

Torrence's subsequent uncollected verses have a deeper 
force, a more concentrated fire. In " The Bird and the Tree " 
and " Eye- Witness," he has caught something more than the 
colors of certain localities — particularly of the dark belt. They 
are as eloquent and moving as his Granny Maumee and Other 
Plays (1917), which owe their power not only to Torrence's 
gift as a poet but to his sympathy as a folk-lyrist. 



THE BIRD AND THE TREE 

Blackbird, blackbird in the cage, 
There's something wrong to-night. 
Far off the sheriff's footfall dies. 
The minutes crawl like last year's flies 
Between the bars, and like an age 
The hours are long to-night. 

The sky is like a heavy lid 
Out here beyond the door to-night. 
171 



Ridgely Torrence 

What's that? A mutter down the street. 
What's that? The sound of yells and feet 
For what you didn't do or did 
You'll pay the score to-night. 

No use to reek with reddened sweat* 

No use to whimper and to sweat. 

They've got the rope; they've got the guns, 

They've got the courage and the guns; 

An' that's the reason why to-night 

No use to ask them any more. 

They'll fire the answer through the door — 

You're out to die to-night. 

There where the lonely cross-road lies, 
There is no place to make replies; 
But silence, inch by inch, is there. 
And the right limb for a lynch is there; 
And a lean daw waits for both your eyes, 
Blackbird. 

Perhaps you'll meet again some place. 
Look for the mask upon the face ; 
That's the way you'll know them there — 
A white mask to hide the face. 
And you can halt and show them there 
The things that they are deaf to now, 
And they can tell you what they meant — 
To wash the blood with blood. But how 
If you are innocent? 
172 



Ridgely Torrence 

Blackbird singer, blackbird mute, 

They choked the seed you might have found. 

Out of a thorny field you go— 

For you it may be better so — 

And leave the sowers of the ground 

To eat the harvest of the fruit. 

Blackbird. 

THE SON 

(Southern Ohio Market Town) 

I heard an old farm-wife, 

Selling some barley. 
Mingle her life with life 

And the name " Charley." 

Saying: "The crop's all in, 
We're about through now; 
Long nights will soon begin. 
We're just us two now. 

" Twelve bushels at sixty cents. 

It's all I carried — 
He sickened making fence; 

He was to be married — 

" It feels like frost was near — 

His hair was curly. 
The spring was late that year, 

But the harvest early." 
173 



Robert Frost 

Although known as the chief interpreter of the new New 
England, Robert (Lee) Frost was born in Pan Francisco, Cali- 
fornia, March 26, 1875. At the age of ten he came East to the 
towns and hills where, for eight generations, his forefathers 
had lived. After graduating from the high school at Lawrence, 
^Llssachusetts, in 1892, Frost entered Dardnouth lollcge, wlu-rc 
he remained only a few months. The routine of study was loo 
much for him and, determined to keep his mind free for creaii\ i- 
work, he decided to earn his livinp and became a bobbin boy in 
one of the mills at Lawrence. He had already begun to write 
poetry; a few of his verses had appeared in T/ir Independent. 
But the strange soil-flavored quality which even then distin- 
guished his lines was not relished by the editors, and the very 
magazines to which he sent poems that today are famous, re- 
jected his verse with amazing unanimity. For twrntv years 
Frost continued to write his highly characteristic work in spite 
of the discouraging apathy, and for twenty years the poet 
remained unknown. 

In 1897, two years after his marriage, Frost moved his 
family to Cambridge, Massachusetts, and entered Harvard in 
a final determination to achieve culture. This time he followed 
the cut-and-dried curriculum for two years, but at the end of 
that period he stopped trying to learn and started to teach. 
For three years he taught school, made shoes, edited a weekly 
paper, and in 1900 became a farmer at Derrv, New Hampshire. 
During the next eleven years Frost labored to wrest a living 
from the stubborn rocky hills with srnni success. Loneliness 
claimed him for its own; the ground refused to give him a 
living; the literary world continued to remain oblivious of his 
existence. Frost sought a change of environment and, after a 
few years' teaching at Derry and Plymouth, New Hampshire, 
sold his farm and, with his wife and four children, sailed for 
England in September, 1912. 

For the first time in his life. Frost moved in a literary world. 
London was a hot-bed of poets; groups merged, dissolved and 
separated over night; controversy and creation were in the air. 

174 



Robert Frost 

Frost took his collection of poems to a publisher with few 
hopes, went back to the suburban town of Beaconsfield and 
turned to other matters. A few months later A Boy's Will 
(1913), his first collection, was published and Frost was recog- 
nized at once as one of the few authentic voices of modern 
poetry. 

A Boy's Will, unlike the later volumes, is frankly subjec- 
tive; original in outlook and idiom in spite of certain remi- 
niscences of Browning. Chiefly lyrical, this volume, lacking 
the concentrated emotion of his subsequent works, is a sig- 
nificant introduction to the following book, which has become a 
contemporary classic. Early in 1914, Frost leased a small place 
in Gloucestershire, his neighbors being the poets Lascelles 
Abercrombie and W. W. Gibson. In the spring of the same 
year, North of Boston (1914), one of the most intensely Ameri- 
can books ever printed, was published in England. (See 
Preface.) This is, as he has called it, a "book of people." 
And it is more than that — it is a book of backgrounds as living 
and dramatic as the people they overshadow. Frost vivifies a 
stone wall, an empty cottage, an apple-tree, a mountain, a for- 
gotten wood-pile left 

To warm the frozen swamp as best it could 
With the slow, smokeless burning of decay. 

North of Boston, like its successor, contains much of the finest 
poetry of our time. Rich in its actualities, richer in its spiritual 
values, every line moves with the double force of observation 
and implication. The first poem in the books illustrates this 
power of character and symbolism. Although Frost is not 
arguing for anything in particular, one senses here something 
more than the subterranean enemies of walls. In "Mending 
Wall," we see two elemental and opposed forces. "Something 
there is that doesn't love a wall," insists the seeker after 
causes; "Good fences make good neighbors," doggedly main- 
tains the literal-minded lover of traditions. Here, beneath the 
whimsical turns and pungency of expression, we have the 



Robert Frost 

essence of narionalism versus the internationalist; the struggle 
between a blind responsibility and a pagan iconoclasm. 

So with all of Frosfs characters. Like the worn-out incom- 
petent in "The Death of the Hired Man" (one of the finest 
genre pictures of our time), the country boy in "Birches," or 
the positive, tight-lipped old lady in " The Black Cottage," his 
people are always intensified through the poet's circumlocutory 
but precise psychology. They remain close to their soil. 
Frost's monologs and dramatic idyls, written in a conversational 
blank verse, establish the connection between the vernacular 
and the language of literature; they remain rooted in realism. 
But Frost is never a photographic realist. " There are,'' he 
once said, "two types of realist — the one who offers a good 
deal of dirt with his potato to show that it i* a real one; and 
the one who is satisfied with the potato brushed clean. I'm 
inclined to be the second kind. . To me, the th in g that art 

does for life is to strip it to form."' 

In March, 1915, Frost came back to America — ^to a hill outside 
of Franconia, New Hampshire, to be precise. North of Boston 
had been published in the United States and its author, who 
had left the country an unknown writer, returned to find himself 
famous, ^fountain Interval, containing some of Frost's most 
beautiful poems ("Birches," "An Old Man's Winter Night," 
"The Hill Wife"), appeared in 1916. The idiom is the same 
as in the earlier volumes, but the notes are more varied, the 
convictions are stronger. The essential things are unchanged. 
The first poem in Frost's first book sums it up : 

They would not find me changed from him they knew — 
Only more sure of all I thought was true. 

The fanciful by-play, the sly banter, so characteristic of this 
poet, has made his grimness far less " gray " than some of his 
critics are willing to admit. This elfin whimsy winks through 
the broad bucolic humor of " The Cow in Apple Time," the 
mock pity of " The Road Not Taken," the tenderness of " The 
Runaway and the lovely apostrophe to an orchard in " Good- 
Bye and Keep Cold." 

176 



Robert Frost 

Frost taught at Amherst College from 1916 to 1919, but found 
that his association '.vith scholastic life took too much of his 
creative energy. In 1920, therefore, he bought a few acres in 
Vermont and devoted himself once more to the double labors 
of farmer and poet. Through his lyrics as vpell as his quasi- 
narratives, he has uttered (and is voicing) some of the deepest 
and richest notes in American poetry. 



MENDING WALL 

Something there is that doesn't loye a wall, 
That sends the frozen-ground-swell under it, 
And spills the upper boulders in the sun; 
And makes gaps even two can pass abreast. 
The work of hunters is another thing: 
I have come after them and made repair 
Where they have left not one stone on a stone, 
But they would have the rabbit out of hiding. 
To please the yelping dogs. The gaps I mean, 
No one has seen them made or heard them made, 
But at spring mending-time we find them there. 
I let my neighbor know beyond the hill; 
And on a day we meet to walk the line 
And set the wall between us once again. 
We keep the wall between us as we go. 
To each the boulders that have fallen to each. 
And some are loaves and some so nearly balls 
We have to use a spell to make them balance: 
" Stay where you are until our backs are turned! " 
We wear our fingers rough with handling them. 
177 



Robert Frost 

Oh, just another kind of outdoor game, 

One on a side. It comes to little more: 

He is all pine and I am apple-orchard. 

My apple trees will never get across 

And eat the cones under his pines, I tell him. 

He only says, " Good fences make good neighbors." 

Spring is the mischief in me, and I wonder 

If I could put a notion in his head: 

" JVhy do they make good neighbors ? Isn't it 

Where there are cows? But here there are no cows. 

Before I built a wall I'd ask to know 

What I was walling in or walling out. 

And to whom I was like to give offence. 

Something there is that doesn't love a wall, 

That wants it down ! " I could say " Elves " to him, 

But it's not elves exactly, and I'd rather 

He said it for himself. I see him there, 

Bringing a stone grasped firmly by the top 

In each hand, like an old-stone savage armed. 

He moves in darkness as it seems to me. 

Not of woods only and the shade of trees. 

He will not go behind his father's saying. 

And he likes having thought of it so well 

He says again, '' Good fences make good neighbors." 



THE TUFT OF FLOWERS 

I went to turn the grass once after one 
Who mowed it in the dew before the sun. 
178 



Robert Frost 

The dew was gone that made his blade so keen 
Before I came to view the levelled scene. 

I looked for him behind an isle of trees; 
I listened for his ^^hetstone on the breeze. 

But he had gone his way, the grass all mown, 
And I must be, as he had been, — alone, 

" As all must be," I said within my heart, 
" Whether they work together or apart." 

But as I said it, swift there passed me by 
On noiseless wing a bewildered butterfly. 

Seeking with memories grown dim over night 
Some resting flower of yesterday's delight. 

And once I marked his flight go round and round, 
As where some flower lay withering on the ground. 

And then he flew as far as eye could see. 

And then on tremulous wing came back to me. 

I thought of questions that have no reply. 

And would have turned to toss the grass to dry; 

But he turned first, and led my eye to look 
At a tall tuft of flowers beside a brook, 
179 



Robert Frost 

A leaping tongue of bloom the scythe had spared 
Beside a reedy brook the scythe had bared. 

I left my place to know them by their name, 
Finding them butterfly-weed when I came. 

The mower in the dew had loved them thus, 
By leaving them to flourish, not for us. 

Nor yet to draw one thought of ours to him. 
But from sheer morning gladness at the brim. 

The butterfly and I had lit upon, 
Nevertheless, a message from the dawn. 

That made me hear the wakening birds around, 
And hear his long scythe whispering to the ground. 

And feel a spirit kindred to my own; 

So that henceforth I worked no more alone; 

But glad with him, I worked as with his aid, 
And weary, sought at noon with him the shade; 

And dreaming, as it were, held brotherly speech 
With one whose thought I had not hoped to reach. 

" Men work together," I told him from the heart, 
" Whether they work together or apart." 
1 80 



Robert Frost 



THE DEATH OF THE HIRED MAN 

Mary sat musing on the lamp-flame at the table 
Waiting for Warren. When she heard his step, 
She ran on tip-toe down the darkened passage 
To meet him in the doorway with the news 
And put him on his guard. " Silas is back." 
She pushed him outward with her through the door 
And shut it after her. " Be kind," she said. 
She took the market things from Warren's arms 
And set them on the porch, then drew him down 
To sit beside her on the wooden steps. 

"When was I ever anything but kind to him? 
But I'll not have the fellow back," he said. 
" I told him so last haying, didn't I? 
' If he left then,' I said, ' that ended it.' 
What good is he? Who else will harbour him 
At his age for the little he can do? 
What help he is there's no depending on. 
Off he goes always when I need him most. 
' He thinks he ought to earn a little pay, 
Enough at least to buy tobacco with, 
So he won't have to beg and be beholden.' 
' All right,' I say, ' I can't afford to pay 
Any fixed wages, though I wish I could.' 
' Someone else can.' ' Then someone else will have to.' 
I shouldn't mind his bettering himself 
If that was what it was. You can be certain, 
i8i 



Robert Frost 

When he begins like that, there's someone at him 
Trying to coax him off with pocket-money, — 
In haying time, when any help is scarce. 
In winter he comes back to us. I'm done." 

" Sh ! not so loud : he'll hear you," Mary said. 
" I want him to: he'll have to soon or late." 

" He's worn out. He's asleep beside the stove. 
When I came up from Rowe's I found him here. 
Huddled against the barn-door fast asleep, 
A miserable sight, and frightening, too — 
You needn't smile — I didn't recognize him — 
I wasn't looking for him — and he's changed. 
Wait till you see." 

" Where did you say he'd been ? " 

" He didn't say. I dragged him to the house. 
And gave him tea and tried to make him smoke. 
I tried to make him talk about his travels. 
Nothing would do: he just kept nodding off." 

" What did he say? Did he say anything? " 

" But little." 

"Anything? Mary, confess 
He said he'd come to ditch the meadow for me." 

"Warren!" 

182 



Robert Frost 
" But did he? I just want to know." 

" Of course he did. What would you have him say? 

Surely you wouldn't grudge the poor old man 

Some humble way to save his self-respect. 

He added, if you really care to know, 

He meant to clear the upper pasture, too. 

That sounds like something you have heard before? 

Warren, I wish you could have heard the way 

He jumbled everything. I stopped to look 

Two or three times — he made me feel so queer — 

To see if he was talking in his sleep. 

He ran on Harold Wilson — you remember — 

The boy you had in haying four years since. 

He's finished school, and teaching in his college. 

Silas declares you'll have to get him back. 

He says they two will make a team for work: 

Between them they will lay this farm as smooth! 

The way he mixed that in with other things. 

He thinks young Wilson a likely lad, though daft 

On education — you know how they fought 

All through July under the blazing sun, 

Silas up on the cart to build the load, 

Harold along beside to pitch it on." 

" Yes, I took care to keep well out of earshot." 

" Well, those days trouble Silas like a dream. 
You wouldn't think they would. How some things linger ! 
Harold's young college boy's assurance piqued him, 
183 



Robert Frost 

After so many years he still keeps finding 

Good arguments he sees he might have used. 

I sympathise. I know just how it feels 

To think of the right thing to say too late. 

Harold's associated in his mind with Latin. 

He asked me what I thought of Harold's saying 

He studied Latin like the violin 

Because he liked it — that an argument! 

He said he couldn't make the boy believe 

He could find water with a hazel prong — 

Which showed how much good school had ever done him. 

He wanted to go over that. But most of all 

He thinks if he could have another chance 

To teach him how to build a load of ha}' — " 

" I know, that's Silas' one accomplishment. 
He bundles every forkful in its place, 
And tags and numbers it for future reference, 
So he can find and easily dislodge it 
In the unloading. Silas does that well. 
He takes it out In bunches like birds' nests. 
You never see him standing on the hay 
He's trying to lift, straining to lift himself." 

" He thinks if he could teach him that, he'd be 
Some good perhaps to someone in the world. 
He hates to see a boy the fool of books. 
Poor Silas, so concerned for other folk, 
And nothing to look backward to with pride, 
And nothing to look forward to with hope, 
So now and never any different." 
184 



Robert Frost 

Part of a moon was falling down the west, 

Dragging the whole sky with it to the hills. 

Its light poured softly in her lap. She saw 

And spread her apron to it. She put out her hand 

Among the harp-like morning-glory strings, 

Taut with the dew from garden bed to eaves, 

As if she played unheard the tenderness 

That wrought on him beside her in the night. 

"Warren," she said, "he has come home to die: 

You needn't be afraid he'll leave you this time." 

" Home," he mocked gently. 

" Yes, what else but home ? 
It all depends on what you mean by home. 
Of course he's nothing to us, any more 
Than was the hound that came a stranger to us 
Out of the woods, worn out upon the trail." 

" Home is the place W'here, when you have to go there. 
They have to take you in." 

" I should have called it 
Something you somehow haven't to deserve." 

Warren leaned out and took a step or two. 
Picked up a little stick, and brought it back 
And broke it in his hand and tossed it by. 
" Silas has better claim on us you think 
Than on his brother? Thirteen little miles 
As the road winds would bring him to his door. 
185 



Robert Frost 

Silas has walked that far no doubt to-day. 
Why didn't he go there? His brother's rich, 
A somebody — director in the bank." 

" He never told us that." 

"We know it though." 

" I think his brother ought to help, of course. 

I'll see to that if there is need. He ought of right 

To take him in, and might be willing to — 

He may be better than appearances. 

But have some pity on Silas. Do you think 

If he'd had any pride in claiming kin 

Or anything he looked for from his brother. 

He'd keep so still about him all this time ? " 

" I wonder what's between them." 

" I can tell you. 
Silas is what he is — we wouldn't mind him — 
But just the kind that kinsfolk can't abide. 
He never did a thing so very bad. 
He don't know why he isn't quite as good 
As anyone. He won't be made ashamed 
To please his brother, worthless though he is." 

" I can't think Si ever hurt anyone." 

" No, but he hurt my heart the way he lay 
And rolled his old head on that sharp-edged chair-back. 
He wouldn't let me put him on the lounge. 
You must go in and see what you can do, 
1 86 



Robert Frost 

I made the bed up for him there to-night. 

You'll be surprised at him — how much he's broken. 

His working days are done; I'm sure of it." 

" I'd not be in a hurry to say that." 

" I haven't been. Go, look, see for yourself. 
But, Warren, please remember how it is: 
He's come to help you ditch the meadow. 
He has a plan. You mustn't laugh at him. 
He may not speak of it, and then he may. 
I'll sit and see if that small sailing cloud 
Will hit or miss the moon." 

It hit the moon. 
Then there were three there, making a dim row. 
The moon, the. little silver cloud, and she. 

Warren returned — too soon, it seemed to her. 
Slipped to her side, caught up her hand and waited. 

" Warren," she questioned. 

" Dead," was all he answered. 

GOOD-BYE AND KEEP COLD. 

This saying good-bye on the verge of the dark 
And cold to an orchard so young in the bark, 
Reminds me of all that can happen to harm 
An orchard away at the end of the farm 
All winter cut off by a hill from the house. 
I don't want it girdled by rabbit and mouse, 
187 



Robert Frost 

I don't want it dreamily nibbled for browse 

By deer, and I don't want it budded by grouse, 

(If certain it wouldn't be idle to call, 

I'd summon grouse, rabbit and deer to the wall 

And warn them away with a stick for a gun.) 

I don't want.it stirred by the heat of the sun. 

(We made it secure against being, I hope, 

By setting it out on a northerly slope.) 

No orchard's the worse for the wintriest storm. 

But one thing about it, it mustn't get warm. 

" How often already you've had to be told 

Keep cold, young orchard. Good-bye and keep cold. 

Dread fifty above more than fifty below." 

I have to be gone for a season or so; 

My business awhile is with different trees. 

Less carefully nurtured, less fruitful than these 

And such as is done to their wood with an ax — 

Maples and birches and tamaracks. 

I wish I could promise to lie in the night 

And share in an orchard's arboreal plight. 

When slowly (and nobody comes with a light!) 

Its heart sinks lower under the sod; 

But something has to be left to God. 

THE RUNAWAY 

Once when the snow of the year was beginning to fall, 
We stopped by a mountain pasture to say " Whose colt? " 
A little Morgan had one forefoot on the wall, 
The other curled at his breast. He dipped his head 

188 



Robert Frost 

And snorted to us. And then he had to bolt. 

We heard the miniature thunder where he fled 

And we saw him or thought we saw him dim and grey, 

Like a shadow against the curtain of falling flakes. 

" I think the little fellow's afraid of the snow. 

He isn't winter-broken. It isn't play 

With the little fellow at all. He's running away. 

I doubt if even his mother could tell him, ' Sakes, 

It's only weather.' He'd think she didn't know! 

Where is his mother? He can't be out alone." 

And now he comes again with a clatter of stone 

And mounts the wall again with whited eyes 

And all his tail that isn't hair up straight. 

He shudders his coat as if to throw off flies. 

" Whoever it is that leaves him out so late. 

When other creatures have gone to stall and bin, 

Ought to be told to come and take him in." 



BIRCHES 

When I see birches bend to left and right 
Across the line of straighter darker trees, 
I like to think some boy's been swinging them. 
But swinging doesn't bend them down to stay. 
Ice-storms do that. Often you must have seen them 
Loaded with ice a sunny winter morning 
After a rain. They click upon themselves 
As the breeze rises, and turn many-colored 
As the stir cracks and crazes their enamel. 

189 



Robert Frost 

Soon the sun's warmth makes them shed crystal shells 
Shattering and avalanching on the snow-crust — 
Such heaps of broken glass to sweep away 
You'd think the inner dome of heaven had fallen. 
They are dragged to the withered bracken by the load, 
And they seem not to break ; though once they are bowed 
So low for long, they never right themselves: 
You may see their trunks arching in the woods 
Years afterwards, trailing their leaves on the ground 
Like girls on hands and knees that throw their hair 
Before them over their heads to dry in the sun. 
But I was going to say when Truth broke in 
With all her matter-of-fact about the ice-storm 
(Now am I free to be poetical?) 
I should prefer to have some boy bend them 
As he went out and In to fetch the cows — 
Some boy too far from town to learn baseball, 
Whose only play was what he found himself. 
Summer or winter, and could play alone. 
One by one he subdued his father's trees 
By riding them down over and over again 
Until he took the stiffness out of them, 
And not one but hung limp, not one was left 
For him to conquer. He learned all there was 
To learn about not launching out too soon 
And so not carrying the tree away 
Clear to the ground. He always kept his poise 
To the top branches, climbing carefully 
With the same pains you use to fill a cup 
Up to the brim, and even above the brim. 

190 



Robert Frost 

Then he flung outward, feet first, with a swish. 
Kicking his way down through the air to the ground. 

So was I once myself a swinger of birches; 

And so I dream of going bacic to be. 

It's when I'm weary of considerations. 

And life is too much like a pathless wood 

Where your face burns and tickles with the cobwebs 

Broken across it, and one eye is weeping 

From a twig's having lashed across it open. 

I'd like to get away from earth awhile 

And then come back to it and begin over. 

May no fate wilfully misunderstand me 

And half grant what I wish and snatch me away 

Not to return. Earth's the right place for love: 

I don't know where it's likely to go better. 

I'd like to go by climbing a birch tree. 

And climb black branches up a snow-white trunk 

Toward heaven, till the tree could bear no more, 

But dipped its top and set me down again. 

That would be good both going and coming back. 

One could do worse than be a swinger of birches. 



i^KAGMENTARY BLUE 

Why make so much of fragmentary blue 
In here and there a bird or butterfly 
Or flower or wearing-stone or open eye. 
When heaven presents in sheets the solid hue? 
191 



Robert Frost 

Since earth is earth, perhaps, not heaven (as yet) — 
Though some savants make earth include the sky; 
And blue so far above us comes so high 
It only gives our wish for blue a whet. 

THE ONSET 

Always the same when on a fated night 
At last the gathered snow lets down as white 
As may be in dark woods and with a song 
It shall not make again all winter long — 
Of hissing on the yet uncovered ground, — 
I almost stumble looking up and round, 
As one who, overtaken by the end. 
Gives up his errand and lets death descend 
Upon him where he is, with nothing done 
To evil, no important triumph won 
More than if life had never been begun. 

Yet all the precedent is on my side: 
I know that winter death has never tried 
The earth but it has failed ; the snow may heap 
In long storms an undrifted four feet deep 
As measured against maple, birch and oak ; 
It cannot check the Peeper's silver croak ; 
And I shall see the snow all go down hill 
In water of a slender April rill 
That flashes tail through last year's withered brake 
And dead weeds like a disappearing snake. 
Nothing will be left white but here a birch 
And there a clump of houses with a church. 
192 



William Ellery Leonard 

William Ellery Leonard was born at Plainfield, New Jersey, 
January 25, 1876. He received his A.M. at Harvard in 1899 
and completed his studies at the Universities of Gottingen and 
Bonn. After traveling for several years throughout Europe, 
he became a teacher and has been professor of English in the 
University of Wisconsin since 1906. 

The Vaunt of Man (1912) is Leonard's most representative 
volume. Traditional in form and material, it is anything but 
conservative in spirit. Leonard's insurrectionary fervor speaks 
sonorously in the simplest of his quatrains and the strictest of 
his sonnets. This protesting passion is given an even wider 
sweep in The Lynching Bee (1920), the title-poem being a 
terrific indictment in which the poet's outrage speaks with a 
new ironism. 

Besides his original poetry, Leonard has published several 
volumes of translations from the Greek and Latin as well as 
a series of paraphrases of the fables of JEsop. 



THE IMAGE OF DELIGHT 

how came I that loved stars, moon, and flame, 
And unimaginable wind and sea, 

All inner shrines and temples of the free. 
Legends and hopes and golden books of fame; 

1 that upon the mountain carved my name 
With cliffs and clouds and eagles over me, 

how came I to stoop to loving thee — 

1 that had never stooped before to shame? 

O 'twas not thee ! Too eager of a white 
Far beauty and a voice to answer mine, 
MyseM I built an image of delight, 
Which all one purple day I deemed divine — 
193 



William Ellery Leonard 

And when it vanished in the fiery night, 
I lost not thee, nor any shape of thine. 



TO THE VICTOR 

Man's mind is larger than his brow of tears; 
This hour is not my all of time; this place 
My all of earth; nor this obscene disgrace 
My all of life; and thy complacent sneers 
Shall not pronounce my doom to my compeers 
While the Hereafter lights me in the face. 
And from the Past, as from the mountain's base, 
Rise, as I rise, the long tumultuous cheers. 

And who slays me must overcome a world: 
Heroes at arms, and virgins who became 
Mothers of children, prophecy and song; 
Walls of old cities with their flags unfurled; 
Peaks, headlands, ocean and its isles of fame — 
And sun and moon and all that made me strong! 

Sarah N. Cleg horn 

Sarah Norclifife Cleghorn was born at Norfolk, Virginia, 
February 4, 1876. She came North early in her youth and was 
graduated from Burr and Burton Seminary in Manchester, 
Vermont (in 1895), in which town, after a year at Radcliffe, 
she has lived ever since. 

An ardent worker for lost causes. Miss Cleghorn's fiery spirit 
shines through Portraits and Protests (1917), the first half of 
which is coolly descriptive and the second half, hotly insur- 
rectionary verse. 

194 



Sarah N. CI eg horn 



THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST 

"The unfit die: the fit both live and thrive." 
Alas, who say so? — They who do survive. 

So when her bonfires lighted hill and plain, 
Did Bloody Mary think on Lady Jane. 

So Russia thought of Finland, while her heel 
Fell heavier on the prostrate commonweal. 

So Booth of Lincoln thought: and so the High 
Priests let Barabbas live, and Jesus die. 



THE INCENTIVE 

I saw a sickly cellar plant 
Droop on its feeble stem, for want 
Of sun and wind and rain and dew — 
Of freedom! — Then a man came through 
The cellar, and I heard him say, 
" Poor, foolish plant, by all means stay 
Contented here: for — know you not? — 
This stagnant dampness, mould and rot 
Are your incentive to grow tall 
And reach that sunbeam on the wall." 
— Even as he spoke, the sun's one spark 
Withdrew, and left the dusk more dark. 
195 



Carl Sandburg 

Carl (August) Sandburg was born of Swedish stock at 
Galesburg, Illinois, January 6, 1878. His schooling was hap- 
hazard; at thirteen he went to work on a milk wagon. During 
the next six years he was, in rapid succession, porter in a barber 
shop, scene-shifter in a cheap theatre, truck-handler in a brick- 
yard, turner apprentice in a pottery, dish-washer in Denver 
and Omaha hotels, harvest hand in Kansas wheat fields. These 
tasks equipped him, as no amount of learning could have done, 
to be the laureate of industrial America. When war with 
Spain was declared in 1898, Sandburg, avid for fresh adven- 
ture, enlisted in Company C, Sixth Illinois Volunteers. 

On his return from the campaign in Porto Rico, Sandburg 
entered Lombard College in Galesburg and, for the first time, 
began to think in terms of literature. He had already seen a 
great deal of the world from the roaring alleys of great cities 
as well as from the underside of box-cars; he had loafed, 
fought and expressed himself richly. So, what with the fact 
that the " terrible Swede," as captain of the basket-ball team, 
won a series of new victories, it is little wonder that he was 
idolized by his class-mates and elected editor-in-chief of the 
college paper. 

After leaving college he did all manner of things to earn a 
living. He was advertising manager for a department store 
and worked as district organizer for the Social-Democratic 
party of Wisconsin. He became a salesman, a pamphleteer, a 
newspaperman. On the staff of a business magazine, he became 
a "safety first" expert; his articles on accident prevention 
bringing him before manufacturers' conventions where he talked 
about machinery safeguards and methods found successful in 
reducing injuries in factory organizations. 

In 1904, Sandburg published the proverbial "slender sheaf"; 
a tiny pamphlet of twenty-two poems, uneven in quality but 
strangely like the work of the mature Sandburg in feeling. 
What is more, these experiments anticipated the very inflection 
of the later poems, with their spiritual kinship to Henley, 
Lincoln and Whitman; several of these early experiments (with 

196 



Carl Sandburg 

the exception of the rhymed verses) might be placed, without 
seeming incongruous, in the most recent collection of Sand- 
burg's pieces. The idiom of Smoke and Steel (1920) is more 
intensified, but it is the same idiom as that of " Milville " 
('903)1 which begins: 

Down in southern New Jersey they make glass. 
By day and by night, the fires burn on in Milville and bid the 

sand let in the light. 

Meanwhile the newspaperman was having a hard struggle to 
keep the poet alive. Until he was thirty-six years old, Sand- 
burg was totally unknown to the literary world. In 1914 a 
group of his poems appeared in Poetry; A Magazine of Verse; 
later the same year one of the group (the now famous " Chi- 
cago") was awarded the Levinson prize of two hundred 
dollars. A little more than a year later his first, full-fledged 
book was published, and Sandburg — tardily but triumphantly — 
had arrived. 

Chicago Poems (1916) is full of ferment; it seethes with a 
direct poetry surcharged with tremendous energy. Here is an 
almost animal exultation that is also an exaltation. Sandburg's 
speech is simple and powerful; he uses slang as freely (and 
beautifully) as his predecessors used the now archaic tongue 
of their times. (See Preface.) Immediately the cries of pro- 
test were heard: Sandburg was coarse and brutal; his work 
ugly and distorted; his language unrefined, unfit for poetry. 
His detractors forgot that Sandburg was only brutal when 
dealing with brutality; that beneath his toughness, he was one 
of the tenderest of living poets; that, when he used col- 
loquialisms and a richly metaphorical slang, he was searching 
for new poetic values in "limber, lasting, fierce words'' — un- 
consciously answering Whitman who asked, " Do you suppose 
the liberties and brawn of These States have to do only with 
delicate lady-words? With gloved gentleman-words?" 

Cornhuskers (1918) is another step forward; it is fully as 
sweeping as its forerunner and far more sensitive. The gain 

197 



Carl Sandburg 

in power and restraint is evident in the very first poem, a 
magnificent panoramic vision of the prairie. Here is something 
of the surge of a Norse saga; Cornhuskers is keen with a salty 
vigor, a vast sympathy for all that is splendid and terrible in 
Nature. But the raw violence is restrained to the point of 
mysticism. There are, in this volume, dozens of those delicate 
perceptions of beauty that must astonish those who think that 
Sandburg can write only a big-fisted, rough-neck sort of poetry. 
" Cool Tombs," one of the most poignant lyrics of our time, 
moves with a new music; "Grass" whispers as quietly as the 
earlier " Fog " stole in on stealthy, cat feet. 

Smoke and Steel (1920) is the synthesis and sublimation of its 
predecessors. In this ripest of his collections, Sandburg has 
fused mood, accent and image in a new intensity. It is a fit 
setting for the title poem; it is, in spite of certain over-mystical 
accents, an epic of industrialism. Smoke-belching chimneys are 
here, quarries and great boulders of iron-ribbed rock; here are 
titanic visions: the dreams of men and machinery. And silence 
is here — the silence of sleeping tenements and sun-soaked corn- 
fields. Smoke and Steel is a rich amalgam; indigenous to the 
core. And what makes it so vital is Sandburg's own spirit: a 
never-sated joy in existence, a continually fresh delight in the 
variety and wonder of life. 



COOL TOMBS 

When Abraham Lincoln was shoveled into the tombs, 
he forgot the copperheads and the assassin ... in 
the dust, in the cool tombs. 

And Ulysses Grant lost all thought of con men and Wall 
Street, cash and collateral turned ashes ... in 
the dust, in the cool tombs. 
198 



Carl Sandburg 

Pocahontas' body, lovely as-a poplar, sweet as a red haw- 
in November or a pawpaw in May, did she wonder? 
does she remember? ... in the dust, in the cool 
tombs ? 

Take any streetful of people buying clothes and gro- 
ceries, cheering a hero or throwing confetti and 
blowing tin horns . . . tell me if the lovers are 
losers . . . tell me if any get more than the 
lovers ... in the dust ... in the cool tombs. 



FOG 

The fog comes 
on little cat feet. 

It sits looking 
over harbor and city 
on silent haunches 
and then moves on. 



FROM " SMOKE AND STEEL " 

Smoke of the fields in spring is one. 
Smoke of the leaves in autumn another. 
Smoke of a steel-mill roof or a battleship funnel, 
They all go up in a line with a smokestack. 
Or they twist ... in the slow twist ... of the wind. 

199 



Carl Sandburg 

If the north wind comes they run to the south. 
If the west wind comes they run to the east. 

By this sign 

all smokes 

know each other. 
Smoke of the fields in spring and leaves in autumn, 
Smoke of the finished steel, chilled and blue, 
By the oath of work they swear: " I know you." 

Hunted and hissed from the center 
Deep down long ago when God made us over, 
Deep down are the cinders we came from — 
You and I and our heads of smoke. 

Some of the smokes God dropped on the job 

Cross on the sky and count our years 

And sing in the secrets of our numbers; 

Sing their dawns and sing their evenings, 

Sing an old log-fire song: 

You may put the damper up, 

You may put the damper down. 

The smoke goes up the chimney just the same. 

Smoke of a city sunset skyline. 
Smoke of a country dusk horizon — 

They cross on the sky and count our years. 

Smoke of a brick-red dust 
Winds on a spiral 
Out of the stacks 

200 



Carl Sandburg 

For a hidden and glimpsing moon. 

This, said the bar-iron shed to the blooming mill, 

This is the slang of coal and steel. 

The da^-gang hands it to the night-gang, 

The night-gang hands it back. 

Stammer at the slang of this — 
Let us understand half of it. 

In the rolling mills and sheet mills. 

In the harr and boom of the blast fires. 

The smoke changes its shadow 

And men change their shadow; 

A nigger, a wop, a bohunk changes. 

A bar of steel — it is only 
Smoke at the heart of it, smoke and the blood of a man. 
A runner of fire ran in it, ran out, ran somewhere else. 
And left smoke and the blood of a man 
And the finished steel, chilled and blue. 

So fire runs in, runs out, runs somewhere else again, 
And the bar of steel is a gun, a wheel, a nail, a shovel, 
A rudder under the sea, a steering-gear in the sky; 
And always dark in the heart and through it, 

Smoke and the blood of a man. 
Pittsburg, Youngstown, Gary — they make their steel 
with men. 

In the blood of men and the ink of chimneys 
The smoke nights write their oaths: 

201 



Carl Sandburg 

Smoke into steel and blood into steel; 

Homestead, Braddock, Birmingham, they make their steel 

with men. 
Smoke and blood is the mix of steel. 

The birdmen drone 
In the blue; it is steel 
a motor sings and zooms. 



Steel barb-wire around The Works. 

Steel guns in the holsters of the guards at the gates of 

The Works. 
Steel ore-boats bring the loads clawed from the earth 

by steel, lifted and lugged by arms of steel, sung 

on its way by the clanking clam-shells. 
The runners now, the handlers now, are steel; they dig 

and clutch and haul; they hoist their automatic 

knuckles from job to job ; they are steel making steel. 
Fire and dust and air iight in the furnaces; the pour is 

timed, the billets wriggle; the clinkers are dumped: 
Liners on the sea, skyscrapers on the land ; diving steel 

in the sea, climbing steel in the sky. 



BLUE ISLAND INTERSECTION 

Six street ends come together here. 
They feed people and wagons into the center. 
In and out all day horses with thoughts of nose-bags. 
Men with shovels, women with baskets and baby buggies. 
20? 



Carl Sandburg 

Six ends of streets and no sleep for them all day. 
The people and wagons come and go, out and in. 
Triangles of banks and drug__§tores watch. 
The policemen whistle, the trolley cars bump: 
Wheels, wheels, feet, feet, all day. 

In the false dawn when the chickens blink 
And the east shakes a lazy baby toe at to-morrow. 
And the east fixes a pink half-eye this way. 
In the time when only one milk wagon crosses 
These three streets, these six street ends, 
It is the sleep time and they rest. 
The triangle banks and drug stores rest. 
The policeman is gone, his star and gun sleep. 
The owl car blutters along in a sleep-walk. 



CLEAN CURTAINS 

New •neighbors came to the corner house at Congress 
and Green streets. 

The look of their clean white curtains was the same as 
the rim of a nun's bonnet. 

One way was an oyster pail factory, one way they made 
candy, one way paper boxes, strawboard cartons. 

The warehouse trucks shook the dust of the ways loose 
and the wheels whirled dust — there was dust of hoof 
and wagon wheel and rubber tire — dust of police 
203 



Carl Sandburg 

and fire wagons — dust of the winds that circled at 
midnights and noon listening to no prayers. 

" O mother, I know the heart of you," I sang passing 
the rim of a nun's bonnet — O white curtains — and 
people clean as the prayers of Jesus here in the 
faded ramshackle at Congress and Green. 

Dust and the thundering trucks won — the barrages of 
the street wheels and the lawless wind took their 
way — was it five weeks or six the little mother, the 
new neighbors, battled and then took away the 
white prayers in the windows? 



A. E. F. 

There will be a rusty gun on the wall, sweetheart, 

The rifle grooves curling with flakes of rust. 

A spider will make a silver string nest in the darkest, 

warmest corner of it. 
The trigger and the range-finder, they too will be rusty. 
And no hands will polish the gun, and it will hang on 

the wall. 
Forefingers and thumbs will point absently and casually 

toward it. 
It will be spoken among half-forgotten, wished-to-be- 

forgotten things. 
They will tell the spider: Go on, you're doing good 

work. 

204 



Carl Sandburg 

NOCTURNE IN A DESERTED BRICKYARD 

StufE of the moon 

Runs on the lapping sand 

Out to the longest shadows. 

Under the curving willows, 

And round the creep of the wave line, 

Fluxions of yellow and dusk on the waters 

Make a wide dreaming pansy of an old pond in the night. 

GRASS 

Pile the bodies high at Austerlitz and Waterloo. 
Shovel them under and let me work — 

I am the grass; I cover all. 

And pile them high at Gettysburg 

And pile them high at Ypres and Verdun. 

Shovel them under and let me work. 

Two j'ears, ten years, and passengers ask the conductor: 

What place is this? 

Where are we now? 

I am the grass. 
Let me work. 

Adelaide Crapsey 

Adelaide Crapsey was born, September 9, 1878, at Rochester, 
New York, where she spent her childhood. She entered Vassar 
College in 1897, graduating with the class of 1901. Two years 

205 



Adelaide Crapsey 

after graduation she began work as a teacher of History and 
Literature, in Kemper Hall, Kenosha, Wisconsin, where she 
had attended preparatory school. In 1905 she went abroad, 
studying archaeology in Rome. After her return she essayed to 
teach again but her failing health compelled her to discontmue 
and though she became instructor in Poetics at Smith College 
in 1911, the burden was too great for her. 

Prior to this time she had written little verse, her chief work 
being an analysis of English metrics, an investigation (which 
she never finished) of certain problems in verse structure. In 
1913, aftef her breakdown, she began to write those brief lines 
which, like some of Emily Dickinson's, are so precise and 
poignant. She was particularly happy in her " Cinquains," a 
form that she originated. These five-line stanzas in the strictest 
possible structure (the lines having, respectively, two, four, six, 
eight and two syllables) doubtless owe something to the 
Japanese hokku, but Adelaide Crapsey saturated them with her 
own fragile loveliness. 

" Her death," writes her friend, Claude Bragdon, " was 
tragic. Full of the desire of life she was forced to go, leaving 
her work all unfinished." She died at SaranacLake, New York, 
on October 8, 1914. Her small volume Ferse appeared in 1915, 
and a part of the unfinished Study in English Metrics was 
posthumously published in 1918. 



THREE CINQUAINS 

NOVEMBER NIGHT 

Listen . . . 

With faint dry sound, 

Like steps of passing ghosts, 

The leaves, frost-crisp'd, break from the trees 

And fall. 

206 



Adelaide Crapsey 



TRIAD 

These be 

Three silent things: 

The falling snow ... the hour 

Before the dawn ... the mouth of one 

Just dead. 

THE WARNING 

Just now, 

Out of the strange 

Still dusk ... as strange, as still . . . 

A white moth flew. Why am I grown 

So cold? 

ON SEEING WEATHER-BEATEN TREES 

Is it as plainly in our living shown, 

By slant and twist, which way the wind hath blown ? 

Grace Hazard Conkling 

Grace Hazard Conkling was born in 1878 in New York City. 
After graduating from Smith College in 1899, she studied music 
at the University of Heidelberg (1902-3) and Paris (1903-4). 
Since 1914 she has been a teacher of English at Smith College, 
where she has done much to create an alert interest in poetry. 

Mrs. Conkling's Afternoons of April (1915) and IVilderness 
Songs (r92o) are full of a graciousness that rarely grows cloy- 
ing. Gentle colors and a gentler sadness are here; soft music, 
the whisper of flutes above a plaintive English horn, rises from 
her pages. But the poems are by no means monotonous. A 

207 



Grace Hazard Conkling 

fragrant whimsicality, a child-like freshness vivifies poems like 
" The Whole Duty of Berkshire Brooks," " Dilemma " and 
" Frost on a Window," which reminds one of the manner of 
her amazing daughter, Hilda, (see page 394). 

THE WHOLE DUTY OF BERKSHIRE BROOKS 

To build the trout a crystal stair; 
To comb the hillside's thick green hair; 
To water jewel-weed and rushes; 
To teach first notes to baby thrushes; 
To flavor raspberry and apple 
And make a whirling pool to dapple 
With scattered gold of late October; 
To urge wise laughter on the sober 
And lend a dream to those who laugh; 
To chant the beetle's epitaph; 
To mirror the blue dragonfly, 
Frail air-plane of a slender sky; 
Over the stones to lull and leap 
Herding the bubbles like white sheep; 
The claims of worry to deny, 
And whisper sorrow into sleep! 

FROST ON A WINDOW 
This forest looks the way 
Nightingales sound. 
Tall larches lilt and sway 
Above the glittering ground: 
The wild white cherry spray 
Scatters radiance round. 
208 



Grace Hazard Conkling 

The chuckle of the nightingale 

Is like this elfin wood. 

Even as his gleaming trills assail 

The spirit's solitude, 

These leaves of light, these branches frail 

Are music's very mood. 

The song of these fantastic trees. 
The plumes of frost they wear, 
Are for the poet's whim who sees 
Through a deceptive air. 
And has an ear for melodies 
When never a sound is there. 



Amelia Josephine Burr 

Amelia Josephine Burr was born in New York City in 1878. 
She was educated at Hunter College and has made her home 
in Englewood, New Jersey. 

A great range of interests has been the outstanding feature 
of her work. Too often she yields to her own facility, but there 
is decided vigor in many pages of The Roadside Fire (1912), 
In Deep Places (1914) and Life and Living (1916). 



BATTLE-SONG OF FAILURE 

We strain toward Heaven and lay hold on Hell; 

With starward eyes we stumble in hard ways. 
And to the moments when we see life well 

Succeeds the blindness of bewildered days, — 
209 



Amelia Josephine Burr 

But what of that? Into the sullen flesh 

Our souls drive home the spur with splendid sting. 

Bleeding and soiled, we gird ourselves afresh. 
Forth, and make firm a highway for the King. 

The loveless greed the centuries have stored 

In marshy foulness traps our faltering feet. 
The sins of men whom punishment ignored 

Like fever in our weakened pulses beat; 
But what of that? The shame is not to fail 

Nor is the victor's laurel everything. 
To fight until we fall is to prevail. 

Forth, and make firm a highway for the King. 

Yea, cast our lives into the ancient slough. 

And fall we shouting, with uplifted face; 
Over the spot where mired we struggle now 

Shall march in triumph a transfigured race. 
They shall exult where weary we have wept — 

They shall achieve where we have striven in vain — 
Leaping in vigor where we faintly crept. 

Joyous along the road we paved with pain. 
What though we seem to sink in the morass? 

Under those unborn feet our dust shall sing. 
When o'er our failure perfect they shall pass. 

Forth, and make firm a highway for the King! 



2IO 



Don Marquis 

Donald Robert Perry Marquis was born at Walnut, Bureau 
County, Illinois, July 29, 1878. Since his boyhood he has been 
actively connected with various newspapers, his chief metro- 
politan success being due to his pungent column, " The Sun 
Dial " in the New York Evening Sun. 

Many of Marquis's most penetrating and satiric skits have 
been collected in his prose volumes, Hermione (1916) and 
Prefaces (1919). Besides his burlesque verse. Marquis has 
written a quantity of serious poetry, the best of which he pub- 
lished in Dreams and Dust (1915). 

UNREST 

A fierce unrest seethes at the core 

Of all existing things: 
It was the eager wish to soar 

That gave the gods their wings. 

From what flat wastes of cosmic slime, 
And stung by what quick fire, 

Sunward the restless races climb! — 
Men risen out of mire! 

There throbs through all the worlds that are 
This heart-beat hot and strong 

And shaken systems, star by star. 
Awake and glow in song. 

But for the urge of this unrest 

These joyous spheres are mute; 

But for the rebel in his breast 
Had man remained a brute. 
211 



Don Marquis 

When baffled lips demanded speech, 
Speech trembled into birth — 

(One day the lyric word shall reach 
From earth to laughing earth.) 

When man's dim eyes demanded light, 
The light he sought was born — 

His wish, a Titan, scaled the height 
And flung him back the morn! 

From deed to dream, from dream to deed. 

From daring hope to hope, 
The restless wish, the instant need, 

Still lashed him up the slope! 

I sing no governed firmament. 

Cold, ordered, regular — 
I sing the stinging discontent 

That leaps from star to star! 

John Erskine 

John Erskine was born in New York City, October 5, 1879. 
He graduated from Columbia University, receiving his A.M. in 
1901 and Ph.D. in 1903. He has taught English since 1903, first 
at Amherst College, and (beginning in 1916) at Columbia. 

Although most of Erskine's works have been performed in the 
capacity of editor and essayist, he has written two volumes of 
excellent verse. Actaon and Other Poems (1906) is little more 
than an introduction to The Shadowed Hour (1917), which con- 
tains such keen verses as "Satan" and "Ash-Wednesday" in 
which philosophy and poetry are interknit. 
212 



John Erskine 



DEDICATION 

When imperturbable the gentle moon 

Glides above war and onslaught through the night, 

When the sun burns magnificent at noon 

On hate contriving horror by its light, 

When man, for whom the stars were and the skies, 

Turns beast to rend his fellow, fang and hoof 

Shall we not think, with what ironic eyes 

Nature must look on us and stand aloof? 

But not alone the sun, the moon, the stars. 

Shining unharmed above man's folly move; 

For us three beacons kindle one another 

Which waver not with any kind of wars: 

We love our children still, still them we love 

Who gave us birth, and still we love each other. 



James Branch Cabell 

James Branch Cabell was born at Richmond, Virginia, April 
14, 1879. He taught French and Greek for two years at William 
and Mary College (1896-7), worked in the pressroom of the 
Richmond Times (1898), was on the staff of the New York 
Herald (1899-1901) and began contributing to the magazines 
in 1902, writing over sixty short stories as well as scattered 
essays, translations and papers on historical and biographical 
subjects. 

Although Cabell likes to describe himself as a genealogist, he 
is the author of some of the most exquisite prose in contemporary 
literature. But it is a prose that rises high above its own 

213 



James Branch Cabell 

beauty of style. In books like The Certain Hour (i9i6)> ^** 
Cream of the Jest (1917), Jurgen (1919) and the poetry-crammed 
"comedy of appearances,'' Figures of Earth (1921), the com- 
posite Cabell hero emerges, triumphant in the midst of his 
defeats — the eternally disillusioned, eternally hopeful Jurgen- 
Charteris-Kennaston: a symbol of the human soul seeking 
some sort of finality, some assurance in a world of illimitable 
perplexities. 

Though Cabell is best known as a novelist, his books are 
liberally dotted with original verses that do duty as chapter- 
headings, mottoes, tail-pieces, interpolated songs and epilogues. 
A complete volume of his verse. From the Hidden Way (1916), 
bore the subtitle " Being Seventy-Five Adaptations." It pur- 
ported to be paraphrases from forgotten troubadours like 
Allesandro de Medici, Antoine Riczi, Charles Garnier and half 
a dozen other obscure Parnassians. Cabell even quoted the 
first lines of each of their poems in the original Latin, French 
or Provencal. Even after the hoax was exposed, it was dif- 
ficult for most readers to believe that the entire collection — 
names, references, first lines in the " original " and all — were 
the creation of Cabell, the masquerader. 

In From the Hidden Way, the romancer has added another 
story to that gem-studded ivory tower in which Cabell lives 
and escapes the modern world. Whether he echoes the me- 
dieval ballata or the more modern rondeau, roundel and 
sonnet, his is an artifice solidly erected upon art. 



SEA-SCAPES 

I lie and dream in the soft warm sand; and the thunder 

and surge and the baffled roar 
Of the sea's relentless and vain endeavors are a pleasant 

lullaby, here on shore. 

214 



James Branch Cabell 

Since a little hillock screens yonder ageless, tenacious 

battlings (which shatter, and pass 
In foam and spume), I appraise, half-nodding, much sand 

and sky and gaunt nodding grass. 

And I am content to lie and dream ; and I am too drowsy 

to rise, and see 
If it be worth breasting — that ocean yonder, which a 

little hillock hides from me. 



ONE END OF LOVE 

" It is long since we met," she said. 
I answered, " Yes." 

She is not fair, 
But very old now, and no gold 
Gleams in that scant gray withered hair 
Where once much gold was: and, I think. 
Not easily might one bring tears 
Into her eyes, which have become 
Like dusty glass. 

" 'Tis thirty years," 
I said. "And then the war came on 
Apace, and our young King had need 
Of men to serve him oversea 
Against the heathen. For their greed. 
Puffed up at Tunis, troubles him— — ■" 
215 



James Branch Cabell 

She said : " This week my son is gone 

To him at Paris with his men." 

And then: " You never married, John? " 

I answered, " No." And so we sate 
Musing a while. 

Then with his guests 
Came Robert; and his thin voice broke 
Upon my dream, with the old jests. 
No food for laughter now : and swore 
We must be friends now that our feud 
Was overpast. 

" We are grown old — 
Eh, John? " he said. " And, by the Rood! 
'Tis time we were at peace with God 
Who are not long for this world." 

" Yea," 
I answered ; " we are old." And then. 
Remembering that April day 
At Calais, and that hawthorn field 
Wherein we fought long since, I said : 
" We are friends now." 

And she sate by, 
Scarce heeding. Thus the evening sped. 

And we ride homeward now, and I 
Ride moodily ; my palfrey jogs 
Along a rock-strewn way the moon 
Lights up for us ; yonder the bogs 

2l6 



James Branch Cabell 

Are curdled with thin ice; the trees 
Are naked; from the barren wold 
The wind comes like a blade aslant 
Across a world grown very old. 

Vachel Lindsay 

(Nicholas) Vachel Lindsay was born in the house where he 
still lives in Springfield, Illinois, November lo, 1879. His home 
is next door to the Executive mansion of the State of Illinois; 
from the window where Lindsay does most of his writing, he 
saw many Governors come and go, including the martyred 
John P. Altgeld, whom he has celebrated in one of his finest 
poems. He graduated from the Springfield High School, at- 
tended Hiram College (1897-1900), studied at the Art Institute 
at Chicago (1900-3) and at the New York School of Art (1904). 
After two years of lecturing and settlement work, he took the 
first of his long tramps, walking through Florida, Georgia and 
the Carolinas, preaching " the gospel of beauty," and formulat- 
ing his unique plans for a communal art. (See Preface.) 
During the following five years, Lindsay made several of these 
trips, travelling as a combination missionary and minstrel. 
Like a true revivalist, he attempted to wake in the people he 
met, a response to beauty; like Tommy Tucker, he sang, recited 
and chanted for his supper, distributing a little pamphlet en- 
titled " Rhymes to be Traded for Bread." 

Lindsay began to create more poetry to reach the public — all 
of his verse being written in his role of apostle. He was, 
primarily, a rhyming John the Baptist singing to convert the 
heathen, to stimulate and encourage the half-hearted dreams 
that hide and are lost in our sordid villages and townships. 
But the great audiences he was endeavoring to reach did not 
hear him, even though his collection General Booth Enters Into 
Heaven (1913) struck many a loud and racy note. 

Lindsay broadened his effects, developed the chant and, the 
217 



Vachel Lindsay 

following year, published his The Congo and Other Poems 
(1914), an infectious blend of rhymes, ragtime and religion. 
In the title-poem and, in a lesser degree, the three companion 
chants, Lindsay struck his most powerful — and most popular — 
vein. They gave people (particularly when intoned aloud) that 
primitive joy in syncopated sound that is at the very base of 
song. In these experiments in breaking down the barriers be- 
tween poetry and music, Lindsay (obviously infected by the 
echolalia of Poe's "Bells") tried to create what he called a 
" Higher Vaudeville " imagination, carrying the form back to 
the old Greek precedent where every line was half-spoken, 
half-sung. 

Lindsay's innovation succeeded at once. The novelty, the 
speed, the clatter forced the attention of people who had never 
paid the slightest heed to the poet's quieter verses. Men heard 
the sounds of energetic America in these lines even when they 
were deaf to its spirit. They failed to see that, beneath the 
noise of "The Kallyope Yell" and "The Sante Fe Trail," 
Lindsay was partly an admirer, partly an ironical critic of the 
shrieking energy of these states. By his effort to win the enemy 
over, Lindsay had persuaded the proverbially tired business man 
to listen at last. But, in overstressing the vaudeville features, 
there arose the danger of Lindsay the poet being lost in Lindsay 
the entertainer. The sympathetic and colorful studies of negro 
spirits and psychology (seen at their best in "The Congo," 
" John Brown " and " Simon Legree ") degenerated into the 
crude buffooneries of " The Daniel Jazz " and " The Black- 
smith's Serenade." 

But Lindsay's earnestness, keyed up by an exuberant fancy, 
saved him. The Chinese Nightingale (1917) begins with one 
of the most whimsical pieces Lindsay has ever devised. And if 
the subsequent The Golden Whales of California (1920) is less 
distinctive, it is principally because the author has written too 
much and too speedily to be self-critical. It is his peculiar 
appraisal of loveliness, the rollicking high spirits joined to a 

2l8 



Vachel Lindsay 

stubborn evangelism, that makes Lindsay so representative a 
product of his environment. 

Besides his original poetry, Lindsay has embodied his ex- 
periences and meditations on the road in two prose volumes, 
A Handy Guide for Beggars (1916) and Adventures While 
Preaching the Gospel of Beauty (1914), as well as a prophetic 
study of the " silent drama," The Art of the Moving Picture 
(1915)- 



THE EAGLE THAT IS FORGOTTEN ^ 

[John P. Altgeld. Born December 30, 184.7; 
died March 12, igo2\ 

Sleep softly . . . eagle forgotten . . . under the stone, 
Time has its way with you there, and the clay has its 

own. 
" We have buried him now," thought your foes, and in 

secret rejoiced. 
They made a brave show of their mourning,, their hatred 

unvoiced. 
They had snarled at you, barked at you, foamed at you, 

day after day, 
Now you were ended. They praised you, . . . and 

laid you away. 

The others that mourned you in silence and terror and 

truth, 
The widow bereft of her pittance, the boy without youth, 

1 Reprinted by permission of the publishers. The Macmillan 
Company, from General William Booth Enters into Heaven and 
Other Poems by Vachel Lindsay. 

219 



Vachel Lindsay 

The mocked and the scorned and the wounded, the lame 

and the poor 
That should have remembered forever, . . . remember 

no more. 

Where are those lovers of yours, on what name do they 

call 
The lost, that in armies wept over your funeral pall? 
They call on the names of a hundred high-valiant ones, 
A hundred white eagles have risen, the sons of j-our sons, 
The zeal in their wings is a zeal that your dreaming 

began, 
The valor that wore out your soul in the service of man. 

Sleep softly, . . . eagle forgotten, . . . under the stone, 
Time has its way with you there, and the clay has its own. 
Sleep on, O brave hearted, O wise man, that kindled 

the flame — 
To live in mankind is far more than to live in a name, 
To live in mankind, far, far more . . . than to live 

in a name. 



220 



Vachel Lindsay 

THE CONGO 1 

{A Study of the Negro Race) 

I. Their Basic Savagery 

Fat black bucks in a wine-barrel room, 

Barrel-house kings, with feet unstable, 

Sagged and reeled and pounded on thc^ ^^^P rolling 

. H bass. 

table. 
Pounded on the table,- 
Beat an empty barrel with the handle of 

a broom. 
Hard as they were able, 
Boom, boom. Boom, 
With a silk umbrella and the handle of 

a broom, 
Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay. Boom. 

Then I had religion, Then I had a 
vision. 

I could not turn from their revel in de- 
rision. 

Then I saw the Congo, creeping More deliberate. 

Solemnly 
THROUGH THE BLACK, ^,,^„^^^ 

Cutting through the jungle with 
A golden track. 

1 Reprinted by permission of the publishers, The Macraillan 
Company, from The Congo and Other Poems by Vachel 
Lindsay. 

221 



A rapidly 



Vachel Lindsay 

Then along that riverbank 

A thousand miles 

Tattooed cannibals danced in files; 

Then I heard the boom of the blood-lust 

song 
And a thigh-bone beating on a tin-pan 

piling climax 
gong. of speed and 

And " Blood " screamed the whistles and '''"^*^*- 

the fifes of the warriors, 
" Blood " screamed the skull-faced, lean 

witch-doctors, 
" Whirl ye the deadly voo-doo rattle, 
Harry the uplands, 
Steal all the cattle, 
Rattle-rattle, rattle-rattle, 
Bing! 

Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, Boom," 
A roaring, epic, rag-time tune 
From the mouth of the Congo 
To the Mountains of the Moon. 
Death is an Elephant, 
Torch-eyed and horrible, 
Foam-flanked and terrible. 
Boom, steal the pygmies. 
Boom, kill the Arabs, 
Boom, kill the white men, 
Hoo, Hoo, Hoo. 

Listen to the yell of Leopold's ghost 
Burning in Hell for his hand-maimed host. 

222 



With a philo- 
sophic pause. 



Shrilly and with 
u heavily ac- 
cented meter. 



Like the wind 
in the chimney. 



Vachel Lindsay 

Hear how the demons chuckle and yell. 

Cutting his hands off, down in Hell. 

Listen to the creepy proclamation, 

Blown through the lairs of the forest- 
nation, 

Blown past the white-ants' hill of clay. 

Blown past the marsh where the butter- 
flies play: — 

" Be careful what you do, 

Or Mumbo- Jumbo, God of the Congo, ^" ""^ "f"""''^ 

And all or the other Heavy accents 

Gods of the Congo, ^■"^, ''""^- 

. Light accents 

Mumbo- Jumbo will hoO-doO you, fery light. Last 

Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you, ''"' ^''"f^'-'^- 

Mumbo- Jumbo will hoo-doo you." 



n. Their Irrepressible High Spirits 
Wild crap-shooters with a whoop and a call ^""'f: f'"" 

. -in ^ high. 

Danced the juba in their gambling^hall 
And laughed fit to kill, and shook the town, 
And guyed the policemen and laughed 

them down 
With a boomlay, boomlay, boomlay. 

Boom. . . . 
Then I saw the Congo, creeping ^^"j' "f!^"^ 

' tn first section. 

through the black, 
Cutting through the jungle with 
A golden track. 

223 



Vachel Lindsay 
A negro fairyland swung into view, Lay emphasis 

. , on the delicate 

A minstrel river ideas. Keep as 

Where dreams come true. light-footed as 

possible. 

The ebony palace soared on high 

Through the blossoming trees to the eve- 
ning sky. 

The inlaid porches and casements shone 

With gold and ivory and elephant-bone. 

And the black crowd laughed till their 
sides were sore 

At the baboon butler in the agate door, 

And the well-known tunes of the parrot 
band 

That trilled on the bushes of that magic- 
land. 

A troupe of skull-faced witch-men came with pomposity. 

Through the agate doorway in suits of 
flame, 

Yea, long-tailed coats with a gold-leaf 
crust 

And hats that were covered with diamond- 
dust. 

And the crowd in the court gave a whoop 
and a call 

And danced the juba from wall to wall. 

But the witch-men suddenly stilled the 

throng With a great 

With a stern cold glare, and a stern old '^f"^;™""" "«<' 

" ' ghosthness. 

song: — 

224 



Vachel Lindsay 

" Mumbo- Jumbo will hoo-doo you." . . . 
Just then from the doorway, as fat as 

shotes With overwhelm- 

Came the cake-walk princes in their long 'gooTlZlr^ and 
red coats, p<>'"P- 

Shoes with a patent leather shine. 

And tall silk hats that were red as 
wine. 

And they pranced with their butterfly 

partners there, W'"' erowing 

Coal-black maidens with pearls in their ^,j^j.^J"„^^(,^j 

Jjgjj- dance-rhythm. 

Knee-skirts trimmed with the jessamine 

sweet. 
And bells on their ankles and little black 

feet. 
And the couples railed at the chant and 

the frown 
Of the witch-men lean, and laughed them 

down. 
(O rare was the revel, and well worth 

while 
That made those glowering witch-men 

smile. ) 

The cake-walk royalty then began 

To walk for a cake that was tall as a 

man 
To the tune of " Boomlay, boomlay, 

Boom," 

225 



Vachel Lindsay 

While the witch-men laughed, with a 

sinister air, with a touch of 

And sang with the scalawags prancing "^s/" ^"''^<^*- 

and 
tnere t as rapidly as 

" Walk with care, walk with care, '"'"''''^ *"«""''' 

Or Mumbo-Jumbo, God of the Congo, 

And all of the other 

Gods of the Congo, 

Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you. 

Beware, beware, walk with care, 

Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, boom. 

Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, boom, 

Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, boom, 

Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay. 

Boom." 

Oh rare was the revel, and well worth ^'"^ thiio- 

, ., Sophie calm. 

while 
That made those glowering witch-men 
smile. 

III. The Hope of their Religion 
A good old negro in the slums of the "/""^ '"''"• , 

^ " With a literal 

town imitation of 

Preached at a sister for her velvet "'"/'"'^^"■'■s 

racket, and 
gown. trance. 

Howled at a brother for his low-down 

ways. 
His prowling, guzzling, sneak-thief days. 
Beat on the Bible till he wore it out. 
Starting the jubilee revival shout. 
226 



Vachel Lindsay 

And some had visions, as tliey stood on 

chairs, 
And sang of Jacob, and the golden stairs. 
And they all repented, a thousand strong. 
From their stupor and savagery and sin 

and w-rong 
And slammed their hymn books till they 

shook the room 
With " Glory, glory, glory," 
And " Boom, boom. Boom." 

Then I saw the Congo, creeping Exactly as in 

the Urst section. 

through the black, 
Cutting through the jungle with 

A golden track. 
And the gray sky opened like a new-rent 

veil 
And showed the apostles with their coats 

of mail. 
In bright white steel they were seated 

round 
And their fire-eyes watched where the 

Congo wound. 
And the twelve apostles, from their 

thrones on high. 
Thrilled all the forest with their heavenly 

crv ' — 

...,., Sung to the 

" Mumbo-Jumbo will die in the jungle; tune of " Hark, 
Never again will he hoo-doo you, f » f'"'«"d 

Never agam will he hoo-doo you. voices." 

227 



Vachel Lindsay 
Then along that river, a thousand miles, «"'''' «""""'' 

° ^ deliberation 

The vine-snared trees fell dowrn in files, and joy. 

Pioneer angels cleared the way 

For a Congo paradise, for babes at play. 

For sacred capitals, for temples clean. 

Gone were the skull-faced witch-men 

lean. 
There, where the wild ghost-gods had ^" " '"''''""• 

high key — as 
wailed delicately as 

A million boats of the angels sailed possible. 

With oars of silver, and prows of blue 
And silken pennants that the sun shone 

through. 
'Twas a land transfigured, 'twas a new 

creation. 
Oh, a singing wind swept the negro 

nation ; 
And on through the backwoods clearing 

flew: — 
" Mumbo- Jumbo is dead in the jungle. To the tune of 
Never again will he hoo-doo you. tiw,"IandZrPs 

Never again will he hoo-doo you." ""^ voices." 

Redeemed were the forests, the beasts and 

the men. 
And only the vulture dared again 
By the far, lone mountains of the moon 
To cry, in the silence, the Congo tune: — 
" Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you. Dying off 

Mumbo- Jumbo will hoo-doo you, Trating^"'^ 

Mumbo . . . Jumbo . . . will . . . terrified 

hoo-doo . . . you." "" "sper. 

228 



Vachel Lindsay 

TO A GOLDEN HAIRED GIRL IN A 
LOUISIANA TOWN 

You are a sunrise, 

If a star should rise instead of the sun. 

You are a moonrise, 

If a star should come in the place of the moon. 

You are the Spring, 

If a face should bloom instead of an apple-bough. 

You are my love, 

If your heart is as kind 

As your young eyes now. 



THE TRAVELLER 

The moon's a devil jester 
Who makes himself too free. 
The rascal is not always 
Where he appears to be. 
Sometimes he is in my heart- 
Sometimes he is in the sea; 
Then tides are in my heart. 
And tides are in the sea. 

O traveller, abiding not 
Where he pretends to be! 



229 



Vachel Lindsay 



A NEGRO SERMON:— SIMON LEGREE 

Legree's big house was white and green. 

His cotton-fields were the best to be seen. 

He had strong horses and opulent cattle, 

And bloodhounds bold, with chains that would rattle. 

His garret was full of curious things: 

Books of magic, bags of gold, 

And rabbits' feet on long twine strings. 

But he went down to the Devil. 

Legree, he sported a brass-buttoned coat, 

A snake-skin necktie, a blood-red shirt. 

Legree, he had a beard like a goat, 

And a thick hairy neck, and eyes like dirt. 

His puffed-out cheeks were fish-belly white. 

He had great long teeth, and an appetite. 

He ate raw meat, 'most every meal, 

And rolled his eyes till the cat would squeal. 

His fist was an enormous size 

To mash poor niggers that told him lies: 

He was surely a witch-man in disguise. 

But he went down to the Devil. 

He wore hip-boots, and would wade all day 
To capture his slaves that had fled away. 
But he went down to the Devil. 
He beat poor Uncle Tom to death 
Who prayed for Legree with his last breath. 
230 



Vachel Lindsay 

Then Uncle Tom to Eva flew, 

To the high sanctoriums bright and new; 

And Simon Legree stared up beneath, 

And cracked his heels, and ground his teeth: 

And went down to the Devil. 

He crossed the yard in the storm and gloom; 
He went into his grand front room. 
He said, " I killed him, and I don't care." 
He kicked a hound, he gave a swear; 
He tightened his belt, he took a lamp. 
Went down cellar to the webs and damp. 
There in the middle of the mouldy floor 
He heaved up a slab ; he found a door — 
And went down to the Devil. 

His lamp blew out, but his eyes burned bright. 

Simon Legree stepped down all night — 

Down, down to the Devil. 

Simon Legree he reached the place, 

He saw one half of the human race, 

He saw the Devil on a wide green throne, 

Gnawing the meat from a big ham-bone, 

And he said to Mister Devil: 

"I see that you have much to eat — 
A red ham-bone is surely sweet. 
I see that you have lion's feet; 
I see your frame is fat and fine, 
I see you drink your poison wine — 
Blood and burning turpentine." 
231 



Vachel Lindsay 

And the Devil said to Simon Legree: 

" I like your style, so wicked and free. 

Come sit and share my throne with me, 

And let us bark and revel." 
And there they sit and gnash their teeth, 
And each one wears a hop-vine wreath. 
They are matching pennies and shooting craps, 
They are playing poker and taking naps. 
And old Legree is fat and fine: 
He eats the fire, he drinks the wine — 
Blood and burning turpentine — ■ 

Domn, down ufith the Devil; 
Doufn, down with the Devilj 
Down, down with the Devil. 



ABRAHAM LINCOLN WALKS AT 
MIDNIGHT * 1 

(In Springfield, Illinois) 

It is portentous, and a thing of state 
That here at midnight, in our little town 
A mourning figure walks, and will not rest. 
Near the old court-house pacing up and down, 

* See pages 51, 114, 123, 345, 252, 323. 

1 Reprinted by permission of the publishers, The Macmillan 
Company, from The Chinese Nightingale and Other Poems by 
Vachel Lindsay. 

232 



Vachel Lindsay 

Or by his homestead, or in shadowed yards 
He lingers where his children used to play, 
Or through the market, on the well-worn stones 
He stalks until the dawn-stars burn away. 

A bronzed, lank man ! His suit of ancient black, 
A famous high top-hat and plain worn shawl 
Make him the quaint great figure that men love. 
The prairie-lawyer, master of us all. 

He cannot sleep upon his hillside now. 
He is among us: — as in times before! 
And we who toss and lie awake for long, 
Breathe deep, and start, to see him pass the door. 

His head is bowed. He thinks of men and kings. 
Yea, when the sick world cries, how can he sleep? 
Too many peasants fight, they know not why; 
Too many homesteads in black terror weep. 

The sins of all the war-lords burn his heart. 
He sees the dreadnaughts scouring every main. 
He carries on his shawl-wrapped shoulders now 
The bitterness, the folly and the pain. 

He cannot rest until a spirit-dawn 
Shall come; — the shining hope of Europe free: 
A league of sober folk, the Workers' Earth, 
Bringing long peace to Cornland, Alp and Sea. 
233 



Vachel Lindsay 

It breaks his heart that things must murder still, 
That all his hours of travail here for men 
Seem yet in vain. And who will bring white peace 
That he may sleep upon his hill again? 



Edwin Meade Robinson 

Edwin Meade Robinson (no relation to Edwin Arlington 
Robinson) was born November i, 1879, at Lima, Indiana. He 
engaged in newspaper work when he was scarcely out of his 
'teens, joining the staff of the Indianapolis Sentinel in 1901. 
He began writing a daily poem in 1904 and, for years, has 
conducted a column of prose and verse in the Cleveland Plain 
Dealer. 

^ilere 'Melodies (1918) is a collection of Robinson's light and 
sentimental verse, an uneven collection. Fifing and Panning 
(1920) is a much fresher and far more vigorous assembling of 
this versifier's humorous and burlesque idioms. One of our 
most adroit technicians, he is especially happy in interior 
rhyming; a poem like "Halcyon Days" contains, beside the 
end-rhymes, rhymes hidden within the lines and others running 
over from line to line. 



HOW HE TURNED OUT 

When he was young, his parents saw (as parents by the 

million see) 
That Rollo had an intellect of quite unequaled brilliancy ; 
They started in his training from the hour of his nativit)', 
And carefully they cultivated every bright proclivitj". 

234 



Edwin Meade Robinson 

At eight, he ate up authors like a literary cannibal, 

At nine he mastered Latin as the Latins mastered 

Hannibal ; 
At ten he knew astronomy and differential calculus, 
And at eleven could dissect the tiniest animalculus. 

At twelve, he learned orthometry, and started in to 

master all 
The different kinds of poetry, the lyric and the pastoral. 
The epic and dramatic, the descriptive and didactical. 
With lessons theoretical and exercises practical. 

Music he learned — the old and sweet, the up-to-date and 

hideous; 
He painted like Apelles and he modeled like a Phidias ; 
In language he was polyglot, in rhetoric Johnsonian, 
In eloquence Websterian, in diction Ciceronian. 

At last, with learning that would set an ordinary head 

agog, 
His education far outshone his most proficient pedagog; 
And so he entered life, with all his lore to lift the lid 

for him — 
And what do you imagine that his erudition did for him? 

Alas! I fear the truth will shock you, rather than amuse 
you all — 

To those who've read this sort of verse, the sequel is 
unusual. 

This man (it's hard on humor, for it breaks the well 
known laws of it!) 

Was happier for h!s learning, and a great success be- 
cause of it! 

235 



Edwin Meade Robinson 
" HALCYON DAYS " 

Ere yet the giants of modern science had gone a-slumming 

in smelly slums, 
And through the Ghettos and lazarettos had put in 

plumbing (and pulled out plums!) 
When wily wizards in inky vizards employed their talents 

at homicide, 
And poisoned goblets for faithless squablets by knightly 

gallants were justified; 
When maids were fairest, and baths were rarest, and 

thaumaturgy was wrought by dames, 
When courts were rotten and faith forgotten, and none 

but clergy could write their names — 

When he who flouted the Church, or doubted, would find 

his neck fast in hempen ruff, 
And saint and sinner thought eggs for dinner and beer 

for breakfast the proper stuff; 
When men were scary of witch and fairy, of haunted 

castle, of spook and elf. 
When every mixer of cough-elixir was thought a vassal 

of Nick himself; 
When income taxes and prophylaxis and Comic Sections 

were yet unborn, 
When Leagues of Nations and Spring Vacations and 

Fall Elections were held in scorn — 

When all brave fellows would fight duellos with sword 

and dagger, with lance and mace. 
When good men guzzled until, clean fuzzled, they'd reel 

and stagger about the place; 
236 



Edwin Meade Robinson 

When pious journeys and jousts and tourneys brought 

high adventure and secret tryst, 
When knives were many, but forks not any — 'twas fist 

to trencher, and mouth to fist! — 
Oh, men had chances for true romances, for fame and 

glory, and knightly acts . . . 
(And childish quarrels and beastly morals, if song and 

story would stick to facts!) 



Franklin P. Adams 

Franklin P. Adams, better known to the readers of his column 
as F. P. A., was born at Chicago, Illinois, November 15, 1881. 
He attended the University of Michigan (1899-1900) and, after 
a brief career as an insurance agent, plunged into journalism. 
Adams had already been an ardent contributor to B. L. T.'s 
"A Line o' Type or Two" and, in 1903, he began conducting 
a column of his own on the Chicago Journal. Late in 1904, he 
came to New York, running his " Always in Good Humor " 
section on The Evening Mail until 1914, when he started "The 
Conning Tower " for the New York Tribune. 

Adams is the author of five volumes of a light verse that is 
not only skilful but energetic as well as facile. Tobogganing 
on Parnassus (1909), In Other Words (1912), By and Large 
(1914), Weights and Measures (1917) and Something Else 
Again (1920) reveal a spirit which is essentially one of mock- 
ery. One admires these books for their impudent — and faithful 
— paraphrases of Horace and Propertius, for their last-line 
twists a la O. Henry, with whom Adams wrote a comic opera 
that never reached New York), for the ease with which their 
author springs his surprises and, perhaps most of all, for 
the healthy satire that runs sharply through all of his col- 
loquial and dexterous lines. 

237 



Franklin P. Adams 



WAR AND PEACE 

" This war is a terrible thing," he said, 

" With its countless numbers of needless dead ; 

A futile warfare it seems to me, 

Fought for no principle I can see. 

Alas, that thousands of hearts should bleed 

For naught but a tyrant's boundless greed ! " 

Said the wholesale grocer, in righteous mood, 
As he went to adulterate salable food. 

Spake as follows the merchant king: 

" Isn't this war a disgraceful thing? 

Heartless, cruel, and useless, too ; 

It doesn't seem that it can be true. 

Think of the misery, want and fear! 

We ought to be grateful we've no war here." 

"Six a week"— to a girl— " That's flat! 
I can get a thousand to work for that." 



THE RICH MAN 

The rich man has his motor-car. 

His country and his town estate. 
He smokes a fifty-cent cigar 
And jeers at Fate. 
238 



Franklin P. Adams 

He frivols through the livelong day, 

He knows not Poverty, her pinch. 
His lot seems light, his heart seems gay; 
He has a cinch. 

Yet though my lamp burns low^ and dim, 

Though I must slave for livelihood — 
Think you that I vv^ould change with him? 
You bet I would! 



THOSE TWO BOYS 

When Bill was a lad he was terribly bad. 

He worried his parents a lot; 
He'd lie and he'd swear and pull little girls' hair; 

His boyhood was naught but a blot. 

At play and in school he would fracture each rule — 
In mischief from autumn to spring; 

And the villagers knew when to manhood he grew 
He would never amount to a thing. 

When Jim was a child he was not very wild; 

He was known as a good little boy; 
He was honest and bright and the teacher's delight — 

To his mother and father a joy. 

All the neighbors were sure that his virtue'd endure. 
That his life would be free of a spot; 

They were certain that Jim had a great head on him 
And that Jim would amount to a lot. 
239 



Franklin P. Adams 

And Jim grew to manhood and honor and fame 

And bears a good name; 
While Bill is shut up in a dark prison cell — 

You never can tell. 

John G. Neihardt 

John Gneisenau Neihardt was born at Sharpsburg, Illinois, 
January 8, 1881. He completed a scientific course at Nebraska 
Normal College in 1897 and lived among the Omaha Indians for 
six years (1901-7), studying their customs, characteristics and 
legends. 

Although he had already published two books, A Bundle of 
Myrrh (1908) was his first volume to attract notice. It was 
full of spirit, enthusiasm and an insistent virility — qualities 
which were extended (and overemphasized) in Man-Song 
(1909). Neihardt found a richer note and a new restraint in 
The Stranger at the Gate (1911) ; the best of the lyrics from 
these three volumes appearing in The Quest (1916). 

Neihardt meanwhile had been going deeper into folk-lore, 
the results of which appeared in The Song of Hugh Glass 
(1915) and The Song of Three Friends (1919). The latter, 
in 1920, divided the annual prize offered by the Poetry Society, 
halving the honors with Gladys Cromwell's Poems. These two 
of Neihardt's are detailed long poems, part of a projected epic 
series celebrating the winning of the West by the pioneers. 
What prevents both volumes from fulfilling the breadth at 
which they aim is the disparity between the author's story and 
his style; essentially racy narratives are recited in an archaic 
and incongruous speech. Yet, in spite of a false rhetoric and 
a locution that considers prairies and trappers in terms of 
" Ilion,'' " Iseult," " Clotho," the " dim far shore of Styx," 
Neihardt has achieved his effects with no little skill. Dramatic, 
stern, and conceived with a powerful dignity, his major works 
are American in feeling if not in execution. 
240 



John G. Neihardt 



WHEN I AM DEAD 

When I am dead and nervous hands have thrust 

My body downward into careless dust; 

I think the grave cannot suffice to hold 

My spirit 'prisoned in the sunless mould ! 

Some subtle memory of you shall be 

A resurrection of the life of me. 

Yea, I shall be, because I love you so, 

The speechless spirit of all things that grow. 

You shall not touch a flower but it shall be 

Like a caress upon the cheek of me. 

I shall be patient in the common grass 

That I may feel your footfall when you pass. 

I shall be kind as rain and pure as dew, 

A loving spirit 'round the life of you. 

When your soft cheeks by perfumed winds are fanned, 

'Twill be my kiss — and you will understand. 

But when some sultry, storm-bleared sun has set, 

/ will be lightning if you dare forget! 

CRY OF THE PEOPLE ^ 

Tremble before thy chattels, 
Lords of the scheme of things! 
Fighters of all earth's battles, 
Ours is the might of kings! 

1 Reprinted by permission of the publishers, The Macmillan 
Company, from The Quest by John G. Neihardt. 

241 



John (J. JMetfiardt 

Guided by seers and sages, 
The world's heart-beat for a drum, 
Snapping the chains of ages. 
Out of the night we come! 

Lend us no ear that pities! 
Offer no almoner's hand ! 
Alms for the builders of cities! 
When will you understand? 
Down with your pride of birth 
And your golden gods of trade! 
A man is worth to his mother, Earth, 
All that a man has made! 

We are the workers and makers. 

We are no longer dumb! 

Tremble, O Shirkers and Takers! 

Sweeping the earth — ^we come! 

Ranked in the world-wide dawn. 

Marching into the day! 

The night is gone and the sword is drawn 

And the scabbard is thrown away! 

LET ME LIVE OUT MY YEARS ^ 

Let me live out my years in heat of blood ! 
Let me die drunken with the dreamer's wine! 
Let me not see this soul-house built of mud 
Go toppling to the dust — a vacant shrine. 

^ Reprinted by permission of the publishers, The Macmillan 
Company, from The Quest by John G. Neihardt. 
242 



John G. N eihardt 

Let me go quickly, like a candle light 
Snuffed out just at the heyday of its glow. 
Give me high noon — and let it then be night! 
Thus would I go. 

And grant that when I face the grisly Thing, 
My song may trumpet down the gray Perhaps. 
Let me be as a tune-swept fiddlestring 
That feels the Master Melody — and snaps! 



Witter Bynner 

Witter Bynner was born at Brooklyn, New York, August lo, 
1881. He was graduated from Harvard in 190Z and has been 
assistant editor of various periodicals as well as adviser to 
publishers. Recently, he has spent much of his time lecturing 
on poetry and travelling in the Orient. 

Young Harvard (1907), the first of Bynner's volumes, was, 
as the name implies, a celebration of his alma mater. The New 
JVorld (1915) is a much riper and far more ambitious effort. 
In this extended poem, Bynner sought — almost too determinedly 
— ^to translate the ideals of democracy into verse. Neither of 
these volumes displays its author's gifts at their best, for 
Bynner is, first of all, a lyric poet. Grenslone Poems (1917) 
and A Canticle of Pan (1920) reveal a more natural singing 
voice. Bynner harmonizes in many keys; transposing, modu- 
lating and shifting from one tonality to another. This very 
ease is his chief defect, for Bynner's facility leads him not only 
to write too much but in too many diflferent styles. Many of 
his poems seem like sounding-boards that echo the tones of 
every poet except the composer of them. Instead of a fusion of 
gifts we have, too often, a disintegration. 

When Bynner is least dexterous he is most ingratiating. 

243 



Witter Bynner 

When he does not try to sound the whole gamut of modern 
poetry from the lyrics of A. E. Housman to the attenuated 
epigrams of Ezra Pound, he can strike his own note with clarity 
and precision. Even in The Beloved Stranger (1919), where 
the borrowed accents of his alter ego are only too apparent, one 
is arrested by lines of musical charm and fluency. 

Under the pseudonym " Emanuel Morgan," Bynner was co- 
author with Arthur Davison Ficke (writing under the name of 
"Anne Knish") of Spectra (1916). Spectra was a serious 
burlesque of some of the extreme manifestations of modern 
poetic tendencies — a remarkable hoax that deceived many of 
the radical propagandists as well as most of the conservative 
critics. 

GRASS-TOPS 

What bird are you in the grass-tops? 
Your poise is enough of an answer. 
With your wing-tips like up-curving fingers 
Of the slow-moving hands of a dancer . . . 

And what is so nameless as beauty, 
Which poets, who give it a name. 
Are only unnaming forever? — 
Content, though it go, that it came. 



VOICES 

O there were lights and laughter 
And the motions to and fro 

Of people as they enter 

And people as they go . . . 
244 



And there were many voices 
Vying at the feast, 

But most I remember 

Yours — who spoke the least. 



A FARMER REMEMBERS LINCOLN * ^ 

"Lincoln?— 

Well, I was in the old Second Maine, 

The first regiment in Washington from the Pine Tree 

State. 
Of course I didn't get the butt of the clip; 
We was there for guardin' Washington — 
We was all green. 

" I ain't never ben to the theayter in my life — 

I didn't know how to behave. 

I ain't never ben since. 

I can see as plain as my hat the box where he sat in 

When he was shot. 

I can tell you, sir, there was a panic 

When we found our President was in the shape he was in ! 

Never saw a soldier in the world but what liked him. 

" Yes, sir. His looks was kind o' hard to forget. 
He was a spare man, 
An old farmer. 

* See pages 51, 114, 123, 232, 252, 323. 

^ Reprinted by permission from Grenstone Poems by Witter 
Bynner. Copyright, 1917, by Frederick A. Stokes Company. 

245 



Witter Bynner 

Everything was all right, you know, 

But he wasn't a smooth-appearin' man at all — 

Not in no ways; 

Thin-faced, long-necked. 

And a swellin' kind of a thick lip like. 

" And he was a jolly old fellow — always cheerful ; 
He wasn't so high but the boys could talk to him their 

own ways. 
While I was servin' at the Hospital 
He'd come in and say, ' You look nice in here,' 
Praise us up, you know. 
And he'd bend over and talk to the boys — 
And he'd talk so good to 'em — so close — 
That's why I call him a farmer. 
I don't mean that everything about him wasn't all right, 

you understand, 
It's just — well, I was a farmer — 
And he was my neighbor, anybody's neighbor. 
I guess even you young folks would 'a' liked him." 



TRAIN-MATES ^ 

Outside hove Shasta, snowy height on height, 

A glory; but a negligible sight. 

For you had often seen a mountain-peak 

But not my paper. So we came to speak . . . 

1 Reprinted by permission from Grenstone Poems by Witter 
Bynner. Copyright, 1917, by Frederick A. Stokes Company. 
246 



Witter Bynner 

A smoke, a smile, — a good way to commence 
The comfortable exchange of difference! 
You a young engineer, five feet eleven. 
Forty-five chest, with football in your heaven, 
Liking a road-bed newly built and clean, 
Your fingers hot to cut away the green 
Of brush and flowers that bring beside a track 
The kind of beauty steel lines ought to lack, — 
And I a poet, wistful of my betters, 
Reading George Meredith's high-hearted letters. 
Joining betweenwhile in the mingled speech 
Of a drummer, circus-man, and parson, each 
Absorbing to himself — as I to me 
And you to you — a glad identity! 

After a time, when others went away, 
A curious kinship made us choose to stay, 
Which I could tell you now; but at the time 
You thought of baseball teams and I of rhyme. 
Until we found that we were college men 
And smoked more easily and smiled again; 
And I from Cambridge cried, the poet still: 
" I know your fine Greek theatre on the hill 
At Berkeley! " With your happy Grecian head 
Upraised, " I never saw the place," you said — 
" Once I was free of class, I always went 
Out to the field." 

Young engineer, you meant 
As fair a tribute to the better part 
As ever I did. Beauty of the heart 
247 



Witter Bynner 

Is evident in temples. But it breathes 
Alive where athletes quicken curly wreaths, 
Which are the lovelier because they die. 
You are a poet quite as much as I, 
Though differences appear in what we do, 
And I an athlete quite as much as you. 
Because you half-surmise my quarter-mile 
And I your quatrain, we could greet and smile. 
Who knows but we shall look again and find 
The circus-man and drummer, not behind 
But leading in our visible estate — 
As discus-thrower and as laureate? 



James Oppenheim 

James Oppenheim was born at St. Paul, Minnesota, May 24, 
1882. Two years later his family moved to New York City, 
where he has lived ever since. After a public school educa- 
tion, he took special courses at Columbia University (1901-3) 
and engaged in settlement work, acting in the capacity of 
assistant head worker of the Hudson Guild Settlement, and 
superintendent of the Hebrew Technical School for Girls 
(1904.-7). His studies and experiences on the lower East Side 
of New York furnished the material for his first, and most 
popular, book of short stories, Doctor Rast (1909). 

Oppenheim's initial venture as a poet, J\Io?idav Mornirg and 
Other Poems (1909), was a tentative collection; half imitative, 
half experimental. In spite of its obvious indebtedness to 
Whitman, most of the verses are in formal meters and regular 
(though ragged) rhyme. Beauty is sought but seldom captured 
here; the message is coughed out between bursts of eloquence 
and fits of stammering. 

248 



James Oppenheim 

With Songs for the New Age (1914) Oppenheim became his 
own liberator. The stammering has gone, the uncouth dis- 
sonances have resolved. One listens to a speech that, echoing 
the Whitmanic sonority, develops a music that is strangely 
Biblical and yet local. It is the expression of an ancient 
people reacting to modernity, of a race in solution. (See 
Preface.) This volume, like all of Oppenheim's subsequent 
work, is analysis in terms of poetry; a slow searching be- 
neath the musical surface that attempts to diagnose the twisted 
soul of man and the twisted times he lives in. The old Isaiah 
note, with a new introspection, rises out of such poems as " The 
Slave," "We Dead," "Tasting the Earth"; the music and 
imagery of the Psalms are heard in "The Flocks," "The Tree" 
and " The Runner in the Skies." 

War and Laughter (1916) holds much of its predecessor's 
exaltation and an almost ecstatic discontent. The Semitic 
blend of delight and disillusion — that quality which hates the 
world for its shams and hypocrisies and loves it in spite of 
them — is revealed in " Greed," in the ironic " Report on the 
Planet Earth " and the brightly affirmative " Laughter." 

The Book of Self (1917) is less notable, an imperfect fusion. 
Oppenheim's preoccupation with analytical psychology mars the 
effect of the long passages which, in themselves, contain flashes 
of clairvoyance. The Solitary (1919) is a great stride for- 
ward; its major section, a long symbolic poem called "The 
Sea," breathes the same note that was the burden of the earlier 
books — " We are flesh on the way to godhood " — with greater 
strength and still greater control. 

Besides his poetry, Oppenheim has published several volumes 
of short stories, four novels, and two poetic plays. During 
1916-17 he was editor of that promising but short-lived maga- 
zine. The Seven Arts. 



249 



James Oppenheim 

THE RUNNER IN THE SKIES 

Who is the runner in the skies, 
With her blowing scarf of stars, 
And our Earth and sun hovering like bees about her 

blossoming heart? 
Her feet are on the winds, where space is deep, 
Her eyes are nebulous and veiled ; 
She hurries through the night to a far lover . . . 



THE SLAVE 

They set the slave free, striking off his chains . 
Then he was as much of a slave as ever. 

He was still chained to servility. 
He was still manacled to indolence and sloth, 
He was still bound by fear and superstition. 
By ignorance, suspicion, and savagery . . . 
His slavery was not in the chains, 
•But in himself. . . . 

They can only set free men free . . . 
And there is no need of that: 
Free men set themselves free. 



250 



James Oppenheim 

TASTING THE EARTH 
In a dark hour, tasting the Earth. 

As I lay on my couch in the muffled night, and the rain 

lashed my window, 
And my forsaken heart would give me no rest, no pause 

and no peace. 
Though I turned my face far from the wailing of my 

bereavement. . . . 
Then I said: I will eat of this sorrow to its last shred, 
I will take it unto me utterly, 

I will see if I be not strong enough to contain it. . . . 
What do I fear? Discomfort? 
How can it hurt me, this bitterness? 

The miracle, then! 

Turning toward it, and giving up to it, 

I found it deeper than my own self. . . . 

O dark great mother-globe so close beneath me . . . 

It was she with her inexhaustible grief, 

Ages of blood-drenched jungles, and the smoking of 

craters, and the roar of tempests. 
And moan of the forsaken seas. 
It was she with the hills beginning to walk in the shapes 

of the dark-hearted animals. 
It was she risen, dashing away tears and praying to dumb 

skies, in the pomp-crumbling tragedy of man . . . 
It was she, container of all griefs, and the buried dust 

of broken hearts, 

251 



James Oppenheun 

Cry of the christs and the lovers and the child-stripped 
mothers, 

And ambition gone down to defeat, and the battle over- 
borne. 

And the dreams that have no waking. . . . 

My heart became her ancient heart: 

On the food of the strong I fed, on dark strange life 

itself : 
Wisdom-giving and sombre with the unremitting love 

of ages. . . . 

There was dank soil in my mouth. 

And bitter sea on my lips. 

In a dark hour, tasting the Earth. 

THE LINCOLN CHILD* 

Clearing in the forest. 
In the wild Kentucky forest, 
And the stars, wintry stars strewn above ! 
O Night that is the starriest 
Since Earth began to roll — 
For a Soul 
Is born out of Love ! 

Mother love, father love, love of Eternal God — 
Stars have pushed aside to let him through — 
Through heaven's sun-sown deeps 
One sparkling ray of God 
* See pages 51, 114, 123, 232, 245, 323. 
252 



James Oppenheim 

Strikes the clod — 

(And while an angel-host through wood and clearing 

sweeps ! ) 
Born in the wild 
The Child- 
Naked, ruddy, new, 
Wakes with the piteous human cry and at the 

mother-heart sleeps. 

To the mother wild berries and honey. 

To the father awe without end. 

To the child a swaddling of flannel — 

And a dawn rolls sharp and sunny 

And the skies of winter bend 

To see the first sweet word penned 

In the godliest human annal. 

Frail Mother of the Wilderness — 
How strange the world shines in 
And the cabin becomes chapel 
And the baby lies secure — 
Sweet Mother of the Wilderness, 
New worlds for you begin, 
You have tasted of the apple 
That giveth wisdom sure. . . . 

Soon in the wide wilderness, 
On a branch blown over a creek. 
Up a trail of the wild coon. 
In a lair of the wild bee, 
253 



James Oppenheim 

The rugged boy, by danger's stress, 
Learnt the speech the wild things speak, 
Learnt the Earth's eternal tune 
Of strife-engendered harmony — 
Went to school where Life itself was master, 
Went to church where Earth was minister — 
And in Danger and Disaster 
Felt his future manhood stir! 

All about him the land, 

Eastern cities, Western prairie, 

Wild, immeasurable, grand; 

But he was lost where blossomy boughs make airy 

Bowers in the forest, and the sand 

Makes brook-water a clear mirror that gives back 

Green branches and trunks black 

And clouds across the heavens lightly fanned. 

Yet all the Future dreams, eager to waken. 
Within that woodland soul — ■ 
And the bough of boy has only to be shaken 
That the fruit drop whereby this Earth shall roll 
A little nearer God than ever before. 
Little recks he of war. 

Of national millions waiting on his word — 
Dreams still the Event unstirred 
In the heart of the boy, the little babe of the wild- 
But the years hurry and the tide of the sea 
Of Time flows fast and ebbs, and he, even he, 
Must leave the wilderness, the wood-haunts wild- 
254 



James Oppenheim 

Soon shall the cyclone of Humanity 
Tearing through Earth suck up this little child 
And whirl him to the top, where he shall be 
Riding the storm-column in the lightning-stroke, 
Calm at the peak, while down below worlds rage. 
And Earth goes out in blood and battle-smoke. 
And leaves him with the sun — an epoch and an age ! 



And lo, as he grew ugly, gaunt, 
And gnarled his way into a man. 
What wisdom came to feed his want, 
What worlds came near to let him scan! 
And as he fathomed through and through 
Our dark and sorry human scheme, 
He knew what Shakespeare never knew. 
What Dante never dared to dream — 
That Men are one 
Beneath the sun. 

And before God are equal souls — 
This truth was his, 
And this it is 

That round him such a glory rolls — 
For not alone he knew it as a truth, 
He made it of his blood, and of his brain — 
He crowned it on the day when piteous Booth 
Sent a whole land to weeping with world pain- 
When a black cloud blotted the sun 
And men stopped in the streets to sob, 
To think Old Abe was dead. 
255 



James Oppenheim 

Dead, and the day's work still undone, 
Dead, and war's ruining heart athrob, 
And earth with fields of carnage freshly spread — 
Millions died fighting. 
But in this man we mourned 
Those millions, and one other — 
And the States to-day uniting. 
North and South, 
East and West, 
Speak with a people's mouth 
A rhapsody of rest 
To him our beloved best. 
Our big, gaunt, homely brother — 
Our huge Atlantic coast-storm in a shawl. 
Our cyclone in a smile — our President, 
Who knew and loved us all 
With love more eloquent 

Than his own words — with Love that in real deeds 
was spent. . . . 

Oh, to pour love through deeds — 

To be as Lincoln was! — 

That all the land might fill its daily needs 

Glorified by a human Cause! 

Then were America a vast World-Torch 

Flaming a faith across the dying Earth, 

Proclaiming from the Atlantic's rocky porch. 

That a New World was struggling at the birth ! 

O living God, O Thou who living art, 
And real, and near, draw, as at that babe's birth, 
256 



James Uppenfietm 

Into our souls and sanctify our Earth — 

Let dowH Thy strength that we endure 

Mighty and pure 

As mothers and fathers of our own Lincoln-child — 

Make us more wise, more true, more strong, more 

mild, 
That we may day by day 
Rear this wild blossom through its soft petals of 

clay; 
That hour by hour 

We may endow it with more human power 
Than is our own — 
That it may reach the go^l 
Our Lincoln long has shown! 
O Child, flesh of our flesh, bone of our bone, 
Soul torn from out our Soul! 
May you be great, and pure, and beautiful — 
A Soul to search this world 
To be a father, brother, comrade, son, 
A toiler powerful; 
A man whose toil is done 
One with God's Law above: 
Work wrought through Love! 



NIGHT NOTE 

A little moon was restless in Eternity 
And, shivering beneath the stars. 
Dropped in the hiding arms of the western hill. 

257 



James Oppenhetm 

Night's discord ceased: 

The visible universe moved in an endless rhythm: 
The wheel of the heavens turned to the pulse of a cricket 
in the grass. 



Alice Corbin 

Alice Corbin (Mrs. William Penhallow Henderson) was 
born in St. Louis, Missouri. She has been Associate Editor of 
Poetry; A Magazine of Verse since 1912, co-editing (with 
Harriet Monroe) The New Poetry, An Anthology (1917). 
Since 1914 she has lived in New Mexico. 

The Spinning Woman of the Sky (1912) contains few hints of 
originality. It is cast in an entirely different key than Miss 
Corbin's later efforts. Her recent verses, many of them un- 
collected, are much richer ; they reveal a close contact with 
primitive people and native folk-lore. Her southern and far 
western sketches are particularly colorful; a volume of New 
Mexico studies, Red Earth (1920), being full of noteworthy 
and sympathetic records. 



ECHOES OF CHILDHOOD 

(A Folk-Medley) 



Uncle Jim 



Old Uncle Jim was as blind as a mole, 
But he could fiddle Virginia Reels, 
Till you felt the sap run out of your heels, 
Till you knew the devil had got your soul — 
258 



Delphy 



Alice Corbin 

Down the middle and swing yo' partners. 
Up agin and salute her low. 
Shake yo' foot an keep a-goin, 
Down the middle an do-se-do! 

Mind yo' manners an doan git keerless. 
Swing yo' lady and bow full low, 
S'lute yo' partner an turn yo' neighbor. 
Gran -right-an -left, and aroun you go! 



Delphy's breast was wide and deep, 
A shelf to lay a child asleep, 

Swing low, sweet chariot, swing low; 
Rocking like a lifted boat 
On lazy tropic seas afloat, 

Swing low, sweet chariot, swing low. 

Delphy, when my mother died, 
Taught me wisdom, curbed my pride, 

Swing low, sweet chariot, swing low; 
And when she laid her body down. 
It shone, a jewel, in His crown. 

Swing low, sweet chariot, swing low. 

* * * 

{Underneath the southern moon 
I was cradled to the tune 
Of the banjo and the fiddle 
And the plaintive negro croon.) 
259 



Mandy's 
Religion 



Betsy's Boy 



Alice Corbin 



I'se got religion an' I dean care 
Who knows that God an' I are square, 
I wuz carryin' home my mistis' wash 
When God came an' spoke to me out'n de 
hush. 

An' I th'ew de wash up inter de air, 
An' I climbed a tree to de golden stair, 
Ef it hadn't a been fur Mistah Wright 

I'd had ter stayed dere all de night! 

* * * 

( Underneath the southern moon 
I was cradled to the tune 
Of the banjo and the fiddle 
And the plaintive negro croon.) 

Betsy's boy could shuffle and clog. 
Though you couldn't get him to saw a log, 
Laziest boy about the place 
Till he started to dance — and you saw his 

face! 
It was all lit up like a mask of bronze 
Set in a niche between temple gongs — 
For he would dance and never stop 
Till he fell on the floor like a spun-out top. 
His feet hung loose from his supple waist, 
He danced without stopping, he danced 

without haste. 
260 



Alice Corbin 

Like Shiva the Hindu his feet were bound 
In the rhythm of stars and of streams un- 
derground : 

Banjo playin' and de sanded floor. 
Fiddle cryin, always callin more. 
Can't help dancin though de preacher 

says 
Can't git to heaven doin no sich ways. 
Can't help dancin' though de devil Stan's 
With a pitch-fork waitin in his brim- 
stone han's; 
Got — ter — keep — dancin, — can't — stop 

— now. 
Got — ter — keep — dancin, I — doan — 
know — how . . . 

Banjo playin and de sanded floor. 
Fiddle cryin, always callin more. 
People's faces lookin scared an white. 
Hands a clappin an eyes starin bright. 
Can't help dancin though de candle's 

dyin, 
Can't help dancin while de fiddle's cryin ; 
Got — ter — keep — dancin, can't — stop — 

now. 
Got — ter — keep — dancin, — / — doan — 

know — how! 



261 



Lola Ridge 

Lola Ridge was born in Dublin, Ireland, leaving there in 
infancy and spending her childhood in Sydney, Australia. 
After living some years in New Zealand, she returned to 
Australia to study art. In 1907, she came to the United 
States, supporting herself for three years by writing fiction for 
the popular magazines. She stopped this work only, as she 
says, " because I found I would have to do so if I wished to 
survive as an artist." For several years she earned her living 
in a variety of ways — as organizer for an educational move- 
ment, as advertisement writer, as illustrator, artist's model, 
factory-worker, etc. In 1918, The New Republic published her 
long poem The Ghetto and Miss Ridge, until then totally un- 
known, became the " discovery " of the year. 

Her volume The Ghetto and Other Poems (1918) contains one 
poem that is brilliant, several that are powerful and none that 
is mediocre. Her title-poem is its pinnacle; in it Miss Ridge 
touches strange heights. It is essentially a poem of the city, 
of its sodden brutalities, its sudden beauties. Swift figures 
shine from these lines, like barbaric colors leaping out of 
darkness; images that are surprising but never strained glow 
with a condensed clarity. In her other poems — especially in 
"The Song of Iron," "Faces" and "Frank Little at Cal- 
vary " — the same dignity is maintained, though with less magic. 

Sun-Up (1920) is less integrated, more frankly experi- 
mental. But the same vibrancy and restrained power that dis- 
tinguished her preceding book are manifest here. Her delinea- 
tions are sensitive and subtle; she accomplishes the maximum 
in effects with a minimum of effort. 



PASSAGES FROM " THE GHETTO " 

Old Sodos no longer makes saddles. 
He has forgotten how . . . 
Time spins like a crazy dial in his brain, 
And night by night 

262 



Lola Ridge 

I see the love-gesture of his arm 

In its green-greasy coat-sleeve 

Circling the Book, 

And the candles gleaming starkly 

On the blotched-paper whiteness of his face, 

Like a misv\^ritten psalm . . . 

Night by night 

I hear his lifted praise. 

Like a broken whinnying 

Before the Lord's shut gate. 



Lights go out 

And the stark trunks of the factories 
Melt into the drawn darkness. 
Sheathing like a seamless garment. 

And mothers take home their babies, 

Waxen and delicately curled. 

Like little potted flowers closed under the stars. 



Lights go out . . . 

And colors rush together, 

Fusing and floating away. 

Pale worn gold like the settings of old jewels . . 

Mauve, exquisite, tremulous, and luminous purples, 

And burning spires in aureoles of light 

Like shimmering auras. 

263 



Lola Ridge 

They are covering up the pushcarts . . . 

Now all have gone save an old man w^ith mirrors — 

Little oval mirrors like tiny pools. 

He shuffles up a darkened street 

And the moon burnishes his mirrors till they shine like 

phosphorus. . . . 
The moon like a skull, 
Staring out of eyeless sockets at the old men trundling 

home the pushcarts. 



A sallow dawn is in the sky 

As I enter my little green room. 

Without, the frail moon, 

Worn to a silvery tissue, 

Throws a faint glamour on the roofs. 

And down the shadowy spires 

Lights tip-toe out . . . 

Softly as when lovers close street doors. 

Out of the Battery 
A little wind 
Stirs idly^as an arm 
Trails over a boat's side in dalliance — 
Rippling the smooth dead surface of the heat. 
And Hester street, 
Like a forlorn woman over-borne 
By many babies at her teats, 
Turns on her trampled bed to meet the day. 
264 



Lola Ridge 

NEW ORLEANS 

Do you remember 

Honey-melon moon 

Dripping thick sweet light 

Where Canal Street saunters off by herself 

among quiet trees ? 
And the faint decayed patchouli — 
Fragrance of New Orleans . . . 
New Orleans, 
Like a dead tube rose 
Upheld in the warm air . . . 
Miraculously whole. 



WIND IN THE ALLEYS 

Wind, rising in the alleys. 

My spirit lifts in you like a banner 

streaming free of hot walls. 
You are full of unshaped dreams . . 
You are laden with beginnings . . . 
There is hope in you . . . not sweet 

acrid as blood in the mouth. 
Come into my tossing dust 
Scattering the peace of old deaths. 
Wind rising out of the alleys 
Carrying stuff of flame. 



265 



Wallace Stevens 

Wallace Stevens, of Hartford, Connecticut, is a poet whose 
peculiar quality is only exceeded by his reticence. He has 
scrupulously kept out of the public eye, has printed his poetry 
only at rare intervals and, though much of his work has been 
highly praised, has steadfastly refused to publish a volume. 

Stevens's best work may be found in the three Others 
anthologies, edited by Alfred Kreymborg. Some of it is pene- 
trative, more than a little is puzzling and all of it is provocative. 
In spite of what seems a weary disdain, Stevens is a more than 
skilful decorator and, like T. S. Eliot, combines irony and 
glamour in a highly original idiom. 

PETER QUINCE AT THE CLAVIER 

I 

Just as my fingers on these keys 
Make music, so the self-same sounds 
On my spirit make a music, too. 

Music is feeling, then, not sound ; 
And thus it is that what I feel, 
Here in this room, desiring you. 

Thinking of your blue-shadowed silk, 
Is music. It is like the strain 
Waked in the elders by Susanna: 

Of a green evening, clear and warm, 
She bathed in her still garden, while 
The red-eyed elders, watching, felt 

The basses of their beings throb 
In witching chords, and their thin blood 
Pulse pizzicati of Hosanna, 
266 



Wallace Stevens 

II 

In the green water, clear and warm, 

Susanna lay, 

She searched 

The touch of springs. 

And found 

Concealed imaginings. 

She sighed, 

For so much melody. 

Upon the bank, she stood 

In the cool 

Of spent emotions. 

She felt, among the leaves. 

The dew 

Of old devotions. 

She walked upon the grass. 

Still quavering. 

The winds were like her maids, 

On timid feet, 

Fetching her woven scarves, 

Yet wavering. 

A breath upon her hand 
Muted the night. 
She turned — 
A cymbal crashed. 
And roaring horns. 
267 



Wallace Stevens 

III 
Soon, with a noise like tambourines, 
Came her attendant Byzantines. 

They wondered why Susanna cried 
Against the elders by her side; 

And as they whispered, the refrain 
Was like a willow swept by rain. 

Anon, their lamps' uplifted flame 
Revealed Susanna and her shame. 

And then, the simpering Byzantines 
Fled, with a noise like tambourines. 

IV 

Beauty is momentary in the mind — 
The fitful tracing of a portal ; 
But in the flesh it is immortal. 

The body dies; the body's beauty lives. 
So evenings die, in their green going, 
A wave, interminably flowing. 
So gardens die, their meek breath scenting 
The cowl of Winter, done repenting. 
So maidens die, to the auroral 
Celebration of a maiden's choral. 

Susanna's music touched the bawdy strings 
Of those white elders; but, escaping, 
268 



Wallace Stevens 

Left only Death's ironic scraping. 

Now, in its immortality, it plays 

On the clear viol of her memory, 

And makes a constant sacrament of praise. 



Alfred Kreymborg 

Alfred Kreymborg, one of the most original of the younger 
insurgents, was born in New York City, December lo, 1883. 
His education was spasmodic, his childhood being spent beneath 
the roar of the elevated trains. At ten he was an expert chess 
player, devoting practically all his time to a study of the game. 
Later, he became a bookkeeper for a few years, but from the 
ages of seventeen to twenty-five he supported himself by 
teaching chess and playing exhibition games. His passion, 
however, was not mathematics but music. He dreamed of 
extending the borders of poetry into the realms of tonic art, 
experimented with new systems of notation, technicalities of 
rhythm. At thirty, he began to turn to the theater as a medium ; 
finding, in this way, fresh contacts that enriched and ripened 
his later work. 

In 1914, he organized that group of radical poets which, 
half-deprecatingly, half-defiantly, called itself " Others." (He 
edited the three anthologies of their work published in 1916, 
1917 and 1919.) Meanwhile, he had been working on a 
technique that was a fresh attempt to rid poetry of its too 
frequent wordiness and rhetorical non-essentials. Mushrooms 
(1916) was the first collection in this vein. Here Kreymborg 
continually sought for simplification, cutting away at his lines 
until they assumed an almost naked expression. Often he 
overdid his efl'ects, attaining nothing more than a false ingenu- 
ousness, a sophisticated simplicity. Often, too, he failed to 
draw the line between what is innocently childlike and what 
is merely childish. One sees him frequently trying to strike 

269 



Alfred Kreymborg 

curious attitudes, tripping over several of his buffooneries and 
sprawling ingloriously. 

But Kreymborg, for all harlequin gestures, can do some- 
thing better than tumble and talk with his tongue in his cheek. 
An elfin fantasy and no little beauty of thought are his when 
he wants to use them. Surprising whimsicality and passages of 
bright color distinguish his Plays for Poem-Mimes (1918), in 
which the principles of modern art are applied to poetry and 
acting, as well as the more developed Plays for Merry Andrews 
(1920). 

Kreymborg's most ambitious volume of poetry, Blood of 
Things (1920), is, for all the surface oddities, the work not only 
of an ardent experimenter but a serious thinker. Humor is in 
these pages, but it is humor lifted to a sort of exaltation. Here, 
in spite of what seems a persistence of occasional charlatanry, is 
a rich and sensitive imagination; a fancy that is as wild as it 
is quick-witted. 

OLD MANUSCRIPT 

The sky 

is that beautiful old parchment 
in which the sun 
and the moon 
keep their diary. 
To read it all, 
one must be a linguist 
more learned than Father Wisdom ; 
and a visionary 

more clairvoyant than Mother Dream. 
But to feel it, 
one must be an apostle: 
one who is more than intimate 
270 



Alfred Kreymborg 

in having been, always, 
the only confidant- 
like the earth 
or the sea. 



DAWNS 

I have come 

from pride 

all the way up to humility 

This day-to-night. 

The hill 

was more terrible 

than ever before. 

This is the top; 

there is the tall, slim tree. 

It isn't bent; it doesn't lean; 

It is only looking back. 

At dawn, 

under that tree, 

still another me of mine 

was buried. 

Waiting for me to come again, 

humorously solicitous 

of what I bring next, 

it looks down. 



271 



Alfred Kreymborg 

HER EYES 

Her eyes hold black whips — 

dart of a whip 

lashing, nay, flicking, 

nay, merely caressing 

the hide of a heart — 
and a broncho tears through canyons- 
walls reverberating, 

sluggish streams 

shaken to rapids and torrents, 

storm destroying 

silence and solitude! 
Her eyes throw black lariats — 

one for his head, 

one for his heels — • 
and the beast lies vanquished — 

walls still, 

streams still — 

except for a tarn, 

or is it a pool, 

or is it a whirlpool 

twitching with memory? 

IMPROVISATION 

Wind: 

Why do you play 
that long beautiful adagio, 
that archaic air, 
272 



Alfred Kreymborg 

to-night 

Will it never end? 
Or is it the beginning, 
some prelude you seek? 



Is it a tale you strum? 
Yesterday, yesterday — 
Have you no more for us? 

Wind: 

Play on. 

There is nor hope 

nor mutiny 

in you. 



Arthur Davison Ficke 

Arthur Davison Ficke was born at Davenport, Iowa, No- 
vember lo, 1883. He received his A.B. at Harvard (1904), 
studied for the law and was admitted to the bar in 1908. In 
1919, after two years' service in France, he gave up his law 
practice and devoted himself to literature exclusively. 

Ficke is the author of ten volumes of verse, the most repre- 
sentative of which are Sonnets of a Portrait Painter (1914), 
The Man on the Hilltop (1915) and An April Elegy (1917). 
In these, the author has distilled a warm spirituality, combining 
freshness of vision with an intensified seriousness. 

Having been an expert collector and student of Japanese 
prints, Ficke has written two books on this theme. His intel- 
lectual equipment is reinforced by a strong sense of satire. 
Writing under the pseudonym " Anne Knish," he was one of 
the co-authors (with Witter Bynner) of Spectra (1916), which, 

273 



Arthur Davison Ficke 

caricaturing some of the wilder outgrowths of the new poetry, 
was taken seriously by a majority of the critics and proved to 
be a brilliant hoa^c. 



PORTRAIT OF AN OLD WOMAN 

She limps with halting painful pace, 
Stops, wavers and creeps on again ; 

Peers up with dim and questioning face. 
Void of desire or doubt or pain. 

Her cheelcs hang gray in waxen folds 
Wherein there stirs no blood at all. 

A hand, like bundled cornstalks, holds 
The tatters of a faded shawl. 

Where was a breast, sunk bones she clasps; 

A knot jerks where were woman-hips; 
A ropy throat sends writhing gasps 

Up to the tight line of her lips. 

Here strong the city's pomp is poured . . . 

She stands, unhuman, bleak, aghast: 
An empty temple of the Lord 

From which the jocund Lord has passed. 

He has builded him another house, 

Whenceforth his flame, renewed and bright, 

Shines stark upon these weathered brows 
Abandoned to the final night. 
274 



Arthur Davison Ficke 

THE THREE SISTERS 

Gone are the three, those sistcro rare 
With wonder-lips and eyes ashine. 

One was wise and one was fair, 
And one was mine. 

Ye mourners, weave for the sleeping hair 

Of only two, your ivy vine. 
For one was wise and one was fair, 

But one was mine. 



SONNET 

There are strange shadows fostered of the moon, 
More numerous than the clear-cut shade of day. . 
Go forth, when all the leaves whisper of June, 
Into the dusk of swooping bats at play; 
Or go into that late November dusk 
When hills take on the noble lines of death, 
And on the air the faint, astringent musk 
Of rotting leaves pours vaguely troubling breath. 
Then shall you see shadows whereof the sun. 
Knows nothing — aye, a thousand shadows there 
Shall leap and flicker and stir and stay and run. 
Like petrels of the changing foul or .fair ; 
Like ghosts of twilight, of the moon, of him 
Whose homeland lies past each horizon's rim. . . 
275 



Badger Clark 

Badger Clark was born at Albia, Iowa, in 1883. He moved 
to Dakota Territory at the age of three months and now lives 
in the Black Hills of South Dakota. 

Clark is one of the few men who have lived to see their 
-rrorir become part of folk-lore; many of his songs having been 
adapted and paraphrased by the cowboys who have made them 
their own. A version of one of his poems ("The Glory 
Trail"), after wide circulation among the ranchers and cow- 
punchers, was printed as an example of anonymous folk-song 
in Poetry; A Magazine of Verse under the title " High-Chin 
Bob " — and credited to " Author Unknown.'' 

Sun and Saddle Leather {1915) and Grass-Grown Trails 
(1917) are the expression of a native singer; happy, spon- 
taneous and seldom "literary." There is wind in these songs; 
the smell of camp-smoke and the colors of prairie sunsets rise 
from them. Free, for the most part, from affectations, Clark 
achieves an unusual ease in his use of the local vernacular. 



THE GLORY TRAIL ^ 

'Way high up the MogoUons, 

Among the mountain tops, 
A lion cleaned a yearlin's bones 

And licked his thankful chops, 
When on the picture who should ride, 

A-trippin' down a slope. 
But High-Chin Bob, with sinful pride 

And mav'rick-hungry rope. 

1 From Sun and Saddle Leather by Badger Clark. Copy- 
right, 1915. Richard G. Badger, Publisher. 
276 



Badger C^ark 

" Oh, glory be to me," says he, 
"And fame's unfadin flowers! 

All meddlin' hands are far away; 

I ride my good top-hawse today 

And I'm top-rope of the Lazy J — 
Hi! kitty cat, you're ours!" 

That lion licked his paw so brown 

And dreamed soft dreams of veal — 
And then the circlin' loop sung down 

And roped him 'round his meal. 
He yowled quick fury to the world 

Till all the hills yelled back; 
The top-hawse gave a snort and whirled 

And Bob caught up the slack. 

" Oh, glory he to me," laughs he. 
" We've hit the glory trail. 
No human man as I have read 
Darst loop a ragin lion's head. 
Nor ever hawse could drag one dead 
Until we told the tale." 

'Way high up the Mogollons 

That top-hawse done his best, 
Through whippin' brush and rattlin' stones, 

From canyon-floor to crest. 
But ever when Bob turned and hoped 

A limp remains to find, 
A red-eyed lion, belly roped 

But healthy, loped behind. 
277 



Badger Clark 

" Oh, glory be to me" grunts he. 

" This glory trail is rough. 
Yet even till the Judgment Morn 
I'll keep this dally 'round the horn. 
For never any hero born 

Could stoop to holler: NuffJ'" 

Three suns had rode their circle home 

Beyond the desert's rim, 
And turned their star-herds loose to roam 

The ranges high and dim; 
Yet up and down and 'round and 'cross 

Bob pounded, weak and wan, 
For pride still glued him to his hawse 

And glory drove him on. 

" Oh, glory he to me!' sighs he. 

" He kaint be drug to death. 
But now I know beyond a doubt 
Them heroes I have read about 
Was only fools that stuck it out 

To end of mortal breath." 

'Way high up the Mogollons 

A prospect man did swear 
That moon dreams melted down his bones 

And hoisted up his hair: 
A ribby cow-hawse thundered by, 

A lion trailed along, 
A rider, ga'nt but chin on high, 

Yelled out a crazy song. 
278 



Badger Clark 

" Oh, glory be to me!" cries he, 

"And to my noble noose! 
Oh, stranger, tell my pards below 
I took a rampin dream in tow. 
And if I never lay him low, 
I'll never turn him loose! " 



THE COYOTE^ 

Trailing the last gleam after, 
In the valleys emptied of light, 

Ripples a whimsical laughter 
Under the wings of the night, 

Mocking the faded west airily, 

Meeting the little bats merrily, 
Over the mesas it shrills 
To the red moon on the hills. 

Mournfully rising and waning, 

Far through the moon-silvered land 

Wails a weird voice of complaining 
Over the thorns and the sand. 

Out of blue silences eerily. 

On to the black mountains wearily. 
Till the dim desert is crossed, 
Wanders the cry, and is lost. 

1 From Grass-Grown Trails by Badger Clark. Copyright, 
X917. Richard G. Badger, Publisher. 

379 



Badger Clark 

Here by the fire's ruddy streamers, 

Tired with our hopes and our fears, 
We inarticulate dreamers 

Hark to the song of our years. 
Up to the brooding divinity 
Far in that sparkling infinity 

Cry our despair and delight. 

Voice of the Western night! 

Marguerite Wilkinson 

Marguerite Ogden Bigelow was born at Halifax, Nova 
Scotia, November 15, 1883. She attended Northwestern Uni- 
versity and married James G. Wilkinson in 1909. 

In Vivid Gardens (1911) is a mixture of original moods and 
derivative manners. The later Bluestone (1920) is a much 
riper collection; a book of lyrics in which the author has made 
many experiments in the combination of rhythmical tunes and 
verbal music. 

Mrs. Wilkinson is also the author of New Voices (1919), a 
series of essays on contemporary verse, reinforced with liberal 
quotations from both English and American poets. 

BEFORE DAWN IN THE WOODS 

Upon our eyelids, dear, the dew will lie. 
And on the roughened meshes of our hair, 

While little feet make bold to scurry by 

And half-notes shrilly cut the quickened air. 

Our clean, hard bodies, on the clean, hard ground 
Will vaguely feel that they are full of power, 

And they will stir, and stretch, and look around. 
Loving the early, chill, half-lighted hour. 
280 



Marguerite Wilkinson 

Loving the voices in the shadowed trees, 

Loving the feet that stir the blossoming grass — 

Oh, always we have known such things as these, 
And knowing, can we love and let them pass? 



Harry Kemp 

Harry (Hibbard) Kemp, known as "the tramp-poet," was 
born at Youngstown, Ohio, December 15, 1883. He came East 
at the age of twelve, left school to enter a factory, but re- 
turned to high school to study English. 

A globe-trotter by nature, he went to sea before finishing his 
high school course. He shipped first to Australia, then to 
China, from China to California, from California to the Uni- 
versity of Kansas. After a few months in London in 1909 (he 
crossed the Atlantic as a stowaway) he returned to New York 
City, where he has lived ever since, founding his own theater 
in which he is actor, stage-manager, playwright and chorus. 

Kemp's first book was a play, Judas (1910), a reversion of 
the biblical figure along the lines of Paul Heyse's Mary of 
Magdala. His first collection of poems, The Cry of Youth 
(1914), like the subsequent volume. The Passing God (1919), 
is full of every kind of poetry except the kind one might 
imagine Kemp would write. Instead of crude and boisterous 
verse, here is a precise and almost over-polished poetry. Kemp 
has, strangely enough, taken the classic formalists for his 
models — one can even detect the whispers of Pope and Dryden 
in his lines. 

Chanteys and Ballads (1920) is riper and more representa- 
tive. The notes are more varied, the sense of personality is 
more pronounced. 



281 



Harry Kemp 



STREET LAMPS 

Softly they take their being, one by one, 

From the lamp-lighter's hand, after the sun 

Has dropped to dusk . . . like .little flowers they bloom 

Set in long rows amid the growing gloom. 

Who he who lights them is, I do not know. 
Except that, every eve, with footfall slow 
And regular, he passes by my room 
And sets his gusty flowers of light a-bloom. 



A PHANTASY OF HEAVEN 

Perhaps he plays with cherubs now. 
Those little, golden boys of God, 

Bending, with them, some silver bough. 
The while a seraph, head a-nod, 

Slumbers on guard; how they will run 
And shout, if he should wake too soon, — 

As fruit more golden than the sun 
And riper than the full-grown moon, 

Conglobed in clusters, weighs them down. 
Like Atlas heaped with starry signs; 

And, if they're tripped, heel over crown, 
By hidden coils of mighty vines, — 
282 



Harry Kemp 

Perhaps the seraph, swift to pounce, 
Will hale them, vexed, to God — and He 

Will only laugh, remembering, once 
He was a boy in Galilee! 



Max Eastman 

Max Eastman was born at Canandaigua, New York, January 
4, 18S3. Both his father and mother had been Congrega- 
tionalist preachers, so it was natural that the son should turn 
from scholasticism to a definitely social expression. Eastman 
had received his A.B. at Williams in 1905; from 1907 to 1911 
he had been Associate in Philosophy at Columbia University. 
But in the latter part of 1911, he devoted all his time to 
writing, studying the vast problems of economic inequality and 
voicing the protests of the dumb millions in a style that was 
all the firmer for being philosophic. In 1913, he became editor 
of The Masses which, in 1917, became The Liberator. 

Child of the Amazons (1913) reveals the quiet lover of beauty 
as well as the fiery hater of injustice. The best of these 
poems, with many new ones, were incorporated in Colors of 
Life (1918). This volume is a far richer collection; a record 
of glowing hours, steadily burning truths. 

Besides Eastman's poems and essays, he has written one of 
the most clarifying — and most readable — studies of the period. 
Enjoyment of Poetry (1913) is invaluable as a new kind of 
text-book, the chief purpose of which, in the words of its 
preface, is to increase enjoyment. Eliminating the usual aca- 
demic and literary classifications, Eastman accomplishes his 
object, which is to show that the poetic in everyday perception 
and conversation should not be separated from the poetic in 
literature. 



283 



Max Eastman 



COMING TO PORT 

Our motion on the soft still misty river 
Is like rest; and like the hours of doom 
That rise and follow one another ever, 
Ghosts of sleeping battle-cruisers loom 
And languish quickly in the liquid gloom. 

From watching them your eyes in tears are gleaming, 
And your heart is still; and like a sound 
In silence is your stillness in the streaming 
Of light-whispered laughter all around. 
Where happy passengers are homeward bound. 

Their sunny journey is in safety ending. 

But for you no journey has an end. 

The tears that to your eyes their light are lending 

Shine in softness to no waiting friend ; 

Beyond the search of any eye they tend. 

There is no rest for the unresting fever 
Of your passion, yearning, hungry-veined ; 
There is no rest nor blessedness forever 
That can clasp you, quivering and pained. 
Whose eyes burn ever to the Unattained. 

Like time, and like the river's fateful flowing, 
Flowing though the ship has come to rest. 
Your love is passing through the mist and going, 
Going infinitely from your breast, 
Surpassing time on its immortal quest. 
284 



Max Eastman 

The ship draws softly to the place of waiting, 

All flush forward with a joyful aim, 

And while their hands with happy hands are mating. 

Lips are laughing out a happy name — 

You pause, and pass among them like a flame. 



HOURS 

Hours when I love you, are like tranquil pools, 
The liquid jewels of the frost, where 
The hunted runner dips his hand, and cools 
His fevered ankles, and the ferny air 
Comes blowing softly on his heaving breast 
Hinting the sacred mystery of rest. 



AT THE AQUARIUM 

Serene the silver fishes glide, 
Stern-lipped, and pale, and wonder-eyed! 
As, through the aged deeps of ocean. 
They glide with wan and wavy motion. 
They have no pathway where they go. 
They flow like water to and fro. 
They watch with never-winking eyes. 
They watch with staring, cold surprise. 
The level people in the air. 
The people peering, peering there: 
285 



Max Eastman 

Who wander also to and fro, 
And know not why or where they go, 
Yet have a wonder in their eyes. 
Sometimes a pale and cold surprise. 



Arturo Giovannitti 

Arturo Giovannitti was born in Abruzzi, Italy, January 7, 
1884. He studied at the college of his native province and 
came to New York when he was eighteen years old. Even as 
a child, Giovannitti had dreamed of America and had 
" learned upon the knees of his mother and father to reverence, 
with tears in his eyes, the name of the republic." With the 
dream of America as the great liberator in his heart, his first 
impressions were shattering. What he saw, through the eyes 
of the laborer, was the whiplash and legal trickery, the few 
ruling the many, the miseries and exploitation of the helpless. 
He thought of becoming a preacher, attended theological 
school ; sought a greater outlet for his passion for democracy 
and became an editor; lectured, wrote pamphlets and worked 
continually to express " a multitude of men lost in an im- 
mensity of silence." 

Although Giovannitti has written several books in Italian, his 
one English volume is Arrows in the Gale (1914). In an elo- 
quent introduction to the poet's rough music and rougher mixture 
of realism and rapture, Helen Keller writes, " He makes us 
feel the presence of toilers behind tenement walls, behind the 
machinery they guide. . . . He finds voice for his message in 
the sighs, the dumb hopes, the agonies and thwartings of men 
who are bowed and broken by the monster hands of ma- 
chines." 

Several of Giovannitti's poems are in rhyme, but his most 
characteristic lines move in uplifted prose poems that shape 
themselves vividly to their subjects. " The Cage," with its 
286 



Arturo Giovannitti 

restrained anger, and "The Walker" are typical. "The 
Walker," unfortunately too long to quote in its entirety, is 
remarkable not only as an art- work but as a document; it is 
a twentieth-century "Ballad of Reading Gaol," with an in- 
tensity and mystical power of which Wilde was incapable. 



FROM " THE WALKER " 

I hear footsteps over my head all night. 

They come and they go. Again they come and they go 
all night. 

They come one eternity in four paces and they go one 
eternity in four paces, and between the coming and 
the going there is Silence and the Night and the 
Infinite. 

For infinite are the nine feet of a prison cell, and endless 
is the march of him who walks between the yellow 
brick wall and the red iron gate, thinking things 
that cannot be chained and cannot be locked, but 
that wander far away in the sunlit world, each in a 
wild pilgrimage after a destined goal. 

Throughout the restless night I hear the footsteps over 

my head. 
Who walks? I know not. It is the phantom of the jail, 

the sleepless brain, a man, the man, the Walker. 
One-two-three-four; four paces and the wall. 
One-two-three-four: four paces and the iron gate. 
He has measured his space, he has measured it accurately, 

scrupulously, minutely, as the hangman measures the 

rope and the gravedigger the coffin — so many feet, 
287 



Arturo Giovannitti 

so many inches, so many fractions of an inch for each 
of the four paces. 

One-two-three-four. Each step sounds heavy and hollow 
over my head, and the echo of each step sounds hol- 
low within ray head as I count them in suspense and 
in dread that once, perhaps, in the endless walk, 
there may be five steps instead of four between the 
yellow brick wall and the red iron gate. 

But he has measured the space so accurately, so scru- 
pulously, so minutely that nothing breaks the grave 
rhythm of the slow, fantastic march. 

All through the night he walks and he thinks. 

Is it more frightful because he walks and his footsteps 
sound hollow over my head, or because he thinks 
and speaks not his thoughts? 

But does he think? Why should he think? Do I think? 
I only hear the footsteps and count them. Four 
steps and the wall. Four steps and the gate. But 
beyond? Beyond? Where goes he beyond the gate 
and the wall? 

He goes not beyond. His thought breaks there on the 
iron gate. Perhaps it breaks like a wave of rage, 
perhaps like a sudden flow of hope, but it always 
returns to beat the wall like a billow of helplessness 
and despair. 

He walks to and fro within the narrow whirlpit of this 
ever storming and furious thought. Only one 
thought — constant, fixed, immovable, sinister, with- 
out power and without voice. 
288 



Arturo Giovannitti 

A thought of madness, frenzy, agony and despair, a hell- 
brewed thought, for it is a natural thought. All 
things natural are things impossible while there are 
jails in the world — bread, work, happiness, peace, 
love. 

But he thinks not of this. As he walks he thinks of the 
most superhuman, the most unattainable, the most 
impossible thing in the world: 

He thinks of a small brass key that turns just half around 
and throws open the red iron gate. 



Eunice Ttetjens 

Eunice Tietjens (nee Hammond) was born in Chicago, 
Illinois, July 29, 1884. She married Paul Tietjens, the com- 
poser, in 1904. During 1914 and 1916 she was Associate 
Editor of Poetry; A Magazine of Verse and went to France as 
war correspondent of the Chicago Daily News (1917-18). Her 
second marriage (to Cloyd Head, the writer) occurred in 
February, 1920. 

Profiles from China (1917) is a series of sketches of people, 
scenes and incidents observed in the interior. Written in a 
fluent free verse, the poems in this collection are alive with 
color and personality. The succeeding Body and Raiment 
(1919) is less integrated, more derivative and diffuse. And 
yet, in spite of certain obvious echoes, individual poems like 
" The Drug Clerk," " The Steam Shovel " and a few others 
are worthy to stand beside her distinguished first volume. 



289 



Eunice Tietjens 



THE MOST-SACRED MOUNTAIN 

Space, and the twelve clean winds of heaven, 

And this sharp exultation, like a cry, after the slow six 

thousand steps of climbing! 
This is Tai Shan, the beautiful, the most holy. 

Below my feet the foot-hills nestle, brown with flecks of 
green; and lower down the flat brown plain, the 
floor of earth, stretches away to blue infinity. 

Beside me in this airy space the temple roofs cut their 
slow curves against the sky. 

And one black bird circles above the void. 

Space, and the twelve clean winds are here; 

And with them broods eternity — a swift, white peace, a 

presence manifest. 
The rhythm ceases here. Time has no place. This is 

the end that has no end. 

Here when Confucius came, a half a thousand years be- 
fore the Nazarene, he stepped, with me, thus into 
timelessness. 

The stone beside us waxes old, the carven stone that 
says: On this spot once Confucius stood and felt the 
smallness of the world below. 

The stone grows old. 

Eternity 

Is not for stones. 

290 



Eunice Tietjens 

But I shall go down from this airy space, this swift white 

peace, this stinging exultation ; 
And time will close about me, and my soul stir to the 

rhythm of the daily round. 
Yet, having known, life will not press so close, 
And always I shall feel time ravel thin about me. 
For once I stood 
In the white windy presence of eternity. 



THE DRUG CLERK 

The drug clerk stands behind the counter 
Young and dapper and debonair. . . . 

Before him burn the great unwinking lights, 

The hectic stars of city nights, 

Red as hell's pit, green as a mermaid's hair. 

A queer half-acrid smell is in the air. 

Behind him on the shelves in ordered rows 

With strange, abbreviated names 

Dwell half the facts of life. That young man knows, 

Bottled and boxed and powdered here. 

Dumb tragedies, deceptions, secret shames. 

And comedy and fear. 

Sleep slumbers here, like a great quiet sea 
Shrunk to this bottle's compass; sleep that brings 
Sweet respite from the teeth of pain 
To those poor tossing things 
291 



Eunice Tiefjens 

That the white nurses watch so thoughtfully. 

And here again 

Dwell the shy souls of Maytime flowers 

That shall make sweeter still those poignant hours 

When wide-eyed youth looks on the face of love. 

And, for those others who have found too late 

The bitter fruits thereof, 

Here are cosmetics, powders, paints, — the arts 

That hunted women use to hunt again 

With scented flesh for bait. 

And here is comfort for the hearts 

Of sucking babes in their first teething pain. 

Here dwells the substance of huge fervid dreams, 

Fantastic, many-colored, shot with gleams 

Of ecstasy and madness, that shall come 

To some pale, twitching sleeper in a bunk. 

And here is courage, cheaply bought 

To cure a blue sick funk, 

And dearly paid for in the final sum. 

Here in this powdered fly is caught 

Desire more ravishing than Tarquin's. . . . 

And at last 
When the one weary hope is past 
Here is the sole escape. 
The little postern in the house of breath 
Where pallid fugitives keep tryst with death. 



All this the drug clerk knows and there he stands, 
Young and dapper and debonair. . . 
292 



Eunice Tietjens 

He rests a pair of slender hands, 
Much manicured, upon the counter there 
And speaks: "No, we don't carry no pomade, 
We only cater to the high-class trade." 



Sara Teasdale 

Sara Teasdale was born August 8, 1884, at St. Louis, Mis- 
souri, and educated there. After leaving school, she traveled in 
Europe and the Near East. In 1914, she married Ernst B. 
Filsinger, who has written several books on foreign trade, and 
moved to New York City in 1916. 

Her first book was a slight volume, Sonnets to Duse (1907), 
giving little promise of the rich lyricism which was to follow. 
Helen of Troy and Other Poems (1911) contains the first hints 
of that delicate craftsmanship and authentic loveliness which 
this poet has brought to such a high pitch. The six monologues 
which open the volume are splendid delineations written in a 
blank verse that is as musical as many of her lyrics. At times 
it suffers from too conscious a cleverness; the dexterity with 
which Miss Teasdale turns a phrase or twists her last line is 
frequently too obtrusive to be wholly enjoyable. 

Rivers to the Sea (1915) emphasizes this epigrammatic skill, 
but a greater restraint is here, a warmer spontaneity. The 
new collection contains at least a dozen unforgettable snatches, 
lyrics in which the words seem to fall into place without art 
or effort. Seldom employing metaphor or striking imagery, 
almost bare of ornament, these poems have the sheer magic of 
triumphant song. Theirs is an artlessness that is more than 
an art. 

Love Songs (1917) is a collection of Miss Teasdale's previous 
melodies for the mola d'amore together with several new tunes. 
The new poems emphasize the way in which this poet achieves 
a direct enchantment without verbal subtleties. They also em- 

293 



Sara Teasdale 

phasize their superiority to the earlier love lyrics that were 
written in a mood of literary romance, of artificial moonlit 
roses, languishing lutes, balconies, passionate guitars — a mood 
that was not so much erotic as Pierrotic. 

Flame and Shadow (1920) is by far the best of her books. 
Here the beauty is fuller and deeper; an almost mystic radi- 
ance plays from these starry verses. Technically, also, this 
volume marks Miss Teasdale's greatest advance. The words 
are chosen with a keener sense of their actual as well as their 
musical values; the rhythms are much more subtle and varied; 
the line moves with a greater naturalness. Beneath the sym- 
bolism of poems like " Water Lilies " and " The Long Hill," 
one is conscious of a finer artistry, a more flexible speech that 
is all the lovelier for its slight (and logical) irregularities. 

Besides her own books. Miss Teasdale has compiled an 
anthology. The Answering Voice (1917), comprising one hun- 
dred love lyrics by women. 



NIGHT SONG AT AMALFI ^ 

I asked the heaven of stars 

What I should give my love — 

It answered me with silence, 
Silence above. 

I asked the darkened sea 

Down where the fishermen go — 

It answered me with silence. 
Silence below. 

^ Reprinted by permission of the publishers, The Macraillan 
Company, from Love Songs by Sara Teasdale. 
294 



Sara Teasdale 

Oh, I could give him weeping, 
Or I could give him song — 

But how can I give silence 
My whole life long? 

SPRING NIGHT 1 

The park is filled with night and fog. 
The veils are drawn about the world, 

The drowsy lights along the paths 
Are dim and pearled. 

Gold and gleaming the empty streets, 
Gold and gleaming the misty lake. 

The mirrored lights like sunken swords. 
Glimmer and shake. 

Oh, is it not enough to be 

Here with this beauty over me? 

My throat should ache with praise, and I 

Should kneel in joy beneath the sky. 

O beauty, are you not enough? 

Why am I crying after love 

With youth, a singing voice, and eyes 

To take earth's wonder with surprise? 

Why have I put off my pride, 

Why am I unsatisfied, — 

I, for whom the pensive night 

Binds her cloudy hair with light, — 

^ Reprinted by permission of the publishers, The Macmillaq 
Company, from Rivers to the Sea by Sara Teasdale, 



Max Eastman 

Who wander also to and fro, 
And know not why or where they go, 
Yet have a wonder in their eyes. 
Sometimes a pale and cold surprise. 



Artiiro Giovannitti 

Artuio Giovannitti was born in Abruzzi, Italy, January 7, 
1884. He studied at the college of his native province and 
came to New York when he was eighteen years old. Even as 
a child, Giovannitti had dreamed of America and had 
" learned upon the knees of his mother and father to reverence, 
with tears in his eyes, the name of the republic." With the 
dream of America as the great liberator in his heart, his first 
impressions were shattering. What he saw, through the eyes 
of the laborer, was the whiplash and legal trickery, the few 
ruling the many, the miseries and exploitation of the helpless. 
He thought of becoming a preacher, attended theological 
school ; sought a greater outlet for his passion for democracy 
and became an editor; lectured, wrote pamphlets and worked 
continually to express " a multitude of men lost in an im- 
mensity of silence." 

Although Giovannitti has written several books in Italian, his 
one English volume is Arrotus in the Gale (1914.). In an elo- 
quent introduction to the poet's rough music and rougher mixture 
of realism and rapture, Helen Keller writes, " He makes us 
feel the presence of toilers behind tenement walls, behind the 
machinery they guide. ... He finds voice for his message in 
the sighs, the dumb hopes, the agonies and thwartings of men 
who are bowed and broken by the monster hands of ma- 
chines.'' 

Several of Giovannitti's poems are in rhyme, but his most 
characteristic lines move in uplifted prose poems that shape 
themselves vividly to their subjects. " The Cage," with its 
286 



Arturo Giovannitti 

restrained anger, and "The Walker" are typical. "The 
Walker," unfortunately too long to quote in its entirety, is 
remarkable not only as an art-work but as a document; it is 
a twentieth-century "Ballad of Reading Gaol," with an in- 
tensity and mystical power of which Wilde was incapable. 



FROM " THE WALKER " 

I hear footsteps over my head all night. 

They come and they go. Again they come and they go 
all night. 

They come one eternity in four paces and they go one 
eternity in four paces, and between the coming and 
the going there is Silence and the Night and the 
Infinite. 

For infinite are the nine feet of a prison cell, and endless 
is the march of him who walks between the yellow 
brick wall and the red iron gate, thinking things 
that cannot be chained and cannot be locked, but 
that wander far away in the sunlit world, each in a 
wild pilgrimage after a destined goal. 

Throughout the restless night I hear the footsteps over 

my head. 
Who walks? I know not. It is the phantom of the jail, 

the sleepless brain, a man, the man, the Walker. 
One-two-three-four: four paces and the wall. 
One-two-three-four: four paces and the iron gate. 
He has measured his space, he has measured it accurately, 

scrupulously, minutely, as the hangman measures the 

rope and the gravedigger the coffin — so many feet, 
287 



Sara Teasdale 



TIRED 

If I shall make no poems any more, 

There will be rest, at least, so let it be, 
Time to look up at golden stars and listen 

To the long mellow thunder of the sea. 
The year will turn for me, I shall delight in 

All animals, and some of my own kind; 
Sharing with no one but myself the frosty 

And half ironic musings of my mind. 



Gladys Cromwell 

Gladys Cromwell was born November 28, 1885, in New 
York City. She was educated in New York private schools 
and lived abroad a great deal. " Her life," writes Anne 
Dunn, " was little indented by outer events, being wholly of 
the mind and spirit." She was most at home in the world 
within herself, sensitive and — to the final, tragic degree — self- 
effacing. 

In January, 1918, Gladys and Dorothea, her twin-sister, 
enrolled in the Canteen Service of the Red Cross, sailed for 
France and were stationed at Chalons. Both girls worked 
unremittingly for eight months. It was only at the end of 
their desperate labors that they gave way to hopelessness, 
believing their efforts futile and the whole world desolate. 
Signs of a mental breakdown show in their diaries as early 
as October. " After the armistice," writes Anne Dunn in her 
biographical note which serves as an appreciative epilogue to 
Gladys Cromwell's Poems, " they showed symptoms of nervous 
prostration; but years of self-control and consideration for 
others made them conceal the black horror in which they lived, 
298 



Gladys Cromwell 

the agony through which they saw a world which, they felt, 
contained no refuge for beauty or quiet thought. And when, 
on their way home, they jumped from the deck of the Lor- 
raine it was in response to a vision that promised them fulfil- 
ment and peace.'' After their death, which occurred January 
19, 1919, the French Government awarded the two sisters the 
Croix de Guerre. 

Gates of Utterance (1915) has something more than the usual 
" promise." But the best of Miss Cromwell's work can be 
found in her posthumously published Poems (1919), which, in 
1920, received the yearly prize offered by the Poetry Society of 
America, dividing the honor with Neihardt's The Song of 
Three Friends. Her most significant poems betray that attitude 
to life which was at the heart of her tragedy — a preoccupation 
that was a mixture of fascination and fear. Her lines, never 
mediocre, are introspective and fraught with serious concern — 
the work of a frailer and unsmiling Emily Dickinson. Several 
of the best of her delicate songs, like the two lyrics quoted, 
tremble on the verge of greatness. 

THE CROWNING GIFT^ 

I have had courage to accuse; 
And a fine wit that could upbraid; 
And a nice cunning that could bruise; 
And a shrewd wisdom, unafraid 
Of what weak mortals fear to lose. 

I have had virtue to despise 
The sophistry of pious fools; 
I have had firmness to chastise; 
And intellect to make me rules 
To estimate and exorcise. 
1 Reprinted by permission of the publishers, The Macmillan 
Company, from Poems by Gladys Cromwell. 

299 



Gladys Cromwell 

I have had knowledge to be true; 
My faith could obstacles remove ; 
But now my frailty I endue. 
I would have courage now to love, 
And lay aside the strength I knew. 

THE MOULD 1 

No doubt this active will, 
So bravely steeped in sun, 
This will has vanquished Death 
And foiled oblivion. 

But this indifferent clay. 
This fine, experienced hand 
So quiet, and these thoughts 
That all unfinished stand. 

Feel death as though it were 
A shadowy caress; 
And win and wear a frail 
Archaic wistfulness. 

Ezra Pound 

Ezra (Loomis) Pound was born at Hailey, Idaho, October 30, 
1885 ; attended Hamilton College and the University of Penn- 
sylvania; and went abroad, seeking fresh material to complete 
a thesis on Lope de Vega, in 1908. After visiting Spain on 
a roundabout journey to England, where he took up his resi- 

1 Reprinted by permission of the publishers. The Macmillan 
Company, from Poems by Gladys Cromwell. 
300 



Ezra Pound 

dence and where he has lived ever since, Pound halted for 
a while in Italy. It was there, in Venice, to be precise, that 
Pound's first book, A Lume Spento (1908), was printed. The 
following year Pound went to London and the chief poems of 
the little volume were incorporated in Persona (1909), a small 
collection containing some of Pound's finest work. 

Although the young American was a total stranger to the 
English literary world, his book made a definite impression on 
critics of all shades and tastes. Edward Thomas, one of the 
most careful appraisers, wrote " the beauty of it is the beauty 
of passion, sincerity and intensity, not of beautiful words and 
images and suggestions. . . . The thought dominates the 
words and is greater than they are." Another critic (Scott 
James) placed the chief emphasis on Pound's metrical inno- 
vations, saying, " At first the whole thing may seem to be 
mere madness and rhetoric, a vain exhibition of force and 
passion without beauty. But as we read on, these curious 
meters seem to have a law and order of their own." 

Exultations (1909) was printed in the autumn of the same 
year that saw the appearance of Persona. It was received with 
even greater cordiality; a new force and freedom were mani- 
fest in such poems as "Sestina: Altaforte," "Ballad of the 
Goodly Fere," " Francesca " and " Histrion." 

In both of these books there was evident Pound's erudition — 
a familiarity with mediaeval literature, Provencal singers. 
Troubadour ballads — that, later on, was to degenerate into 
pedantry and become hard and dry. Too often in his later 
work, Pound seems to be more the archaeologist than the artist, 
digging with little energy and less enthusiasm. Canzoni (1911) 
and Ripostes (1912) both contain much that is sharp and liv- 
ing; they also contain the germs of desiccation and decay. 
Pound began to scatter his talents; to start movements which 
he quickly discarded for new ones ; to spend himself in poetic 
propaganda for the Imagists and others (see Preface) ; to give 
more and more time to translation (The Sonnets of Guido 
Cavalcanti appeared in 1912) and arrangements from the 

301 



Ezra Pound 

Chinese {Cathay, paraphrased from the notes of Ernest 
Fenollosa, was issusd in 1915) ; to lay the chief stress on 
technique, shades of color, verbal nuances. The result was a 
lassitude of the creative faculties, an impoverishment of emo- 
tion. In the later books, Pound begins to suffer from a 
decadence which appraises the values in life chiefly as aesthetic 
values. And this decadence expresses itself in a weariness, a 
sterility of the imagination. Real feeling becomes rarer in his 
vfork and the poet descends to flashy trivialities, vagaries of 
assertion or sheer bra'vado of expression — wasting much of his 
gift in a mere tilting at convention. 

But though this is true of a great quantity of his recent work, 
though he often seems a living anachronism, drawing life not 
from life itself but only from books, many of the poems in 
Lustra (1917) yield a hard brightness. The influence of 
Browning and the pre-Raphaelites is less pronounced and reflec- 
tions of his earlier energy stand out with a peculiar brilliance. 

Too special to achieve permanence, too intellectual to become 
popular. Pound's contribution to his age should not be under- 
estimated. He was a pioneer in the new forms; he fought 
dullness wherever he encountered it; under his leadership the 
Imagists became not only a group but a protest; he helped to 
make many of the paths which a score of unconsciously influ- 
enced poets tread with such ease and nonchalance. Much of 
his poetry gesticulates instead of speaking, a great portion of 
his art is poetry in pantomime. And yet, without Pound, 
American poetry would scarcely have been the many-voiced, 
multi-colored thing that it is. 

A GIRL 

The tree has entered my hands, 
The sap has ascended my arms, 
The tree has grown in my breast 
Downward, 

The branches grow out of me, like arms. 
302 



Ezra Pound 

Tree you are, 

Moss you are, 

You are violets with wind above them. 

A child — so high — you are; 

And all this is folly to the world. 



A VIRGINAL 

No, no! Go from me. I have left her lately. 
I will not spoil my sheath with lesser brightness. 
For my surrounding air has a new lightness; 
Slight are her arms, yet they have bound me straitly 
And left me cloaked as with a gauze of aether; 
As with sweet leaves; as with a subtle clearness. 
Oh, I have picked up magic in her nearness 
To sheathe me half in half the things that sheathe her. 

No, no! Go from me. I have still the flavour, 
Soft as spring wind that's come from birchen bowers. 
Green come the shoots, aye April in the branches. 
As winter's wound with her sleight hand she staunches, 
Hath of the trees a likeness of the savour: 
As white their bark, so white this lady's hours. 



BALLAD FOR GLOOM 

For God, our God is a gallant foe 
That playeth behind the veil. 

303 



Ezra Pound 

I have loved my God as a child at heart 
That seeketh deep bosoms for rest, 
I have loved my God as a maid to man — 
But lo, this thing is best: 

To love your God as a gallant foe that plays behind 

the veil; 
To meet your God as the night winds meet beyond 

Arcturus' pale. 

I have played with God for a woman, 
I have staked with my God for truth, 
I have lost to my God as a man, clear-eyed — 
His dice be not of ruth. 

For I am made as a naked blade, 
But hear ye this thing in sooth: 

Who loseth to God as man to man 

Shall win at the turn of the game. 
I have drawn my blade where the lightnings meet 

But the ending is the same: 
Who loseth to God as the sword blades lose 

Shall win at the end of the game. 

For God, our God is a gallant foe that playeth behind 

the veil. 
When God deigns not to overthrow hath need of triple 
t^>"---mail. 

304 



Ezra Pound 

Aoopia 

Be in me as the eternal moods 

of the bleak wind, and not 
As transient things are — 

gaiety of flowers. 
Have me in the strong loneliness 

of sunless cliffs 
And of gray waters. 

Let the gods speak softly of us 
In days hereafter, 

the shadowy flowers of Orcus 
Remember thee. 



IN A STATION OF THE METRO 

The apparition of these faces in the crowd; 
Petals on a wet, black bough. 



Louis Untermeyer 

Louis Untermeyer was born October i, 1885, in New York 
City, where he has lived, except for brief sojourns in Maine 
and New Jersey, ever since. His education was sketchy; his 
continued failure to comprehend algebra and geometry kept 
him from entering college. His one ambition was to become 
a composer. At sixteen he appeared as a pianist in semi- 
professional circles; at seventeen he entered his father's 
jewelry manufacturing establishment, of which he became de- 
signer and factory manager. 

305 



Louis Untermeyer 

Untermeyer's first volume was The Younger Quire (1911), a 
twenty-four-page burlesque of an anthology {The Younger 
Choir). It was issued anonymously and only one hundred 
copies were printed. Later in the same year, he published a 
sequence of some seventy lyrics entitled First Love (1911) in 
which the influences of Heine, Henley and Housman were not 
only obvious but crippling. With the exception of about eight 
of these songs, the volume is devoid of character and, in spite 
of a certain technical facility, wholly undistinguished. 

It was with Challenge (1914), now in its fourth edition, that 
the author first spoke in his own idiom. Although the ghost 
of Henley still haunts some of these pages, poems like " Sum- 
mons,'' " Landscapes " and " Caliban in the Coal Mines " 
show " a fresh and lyrical sympathy with the modern world. 
. . . His vision" (thus the Boston Transcript) "is a social 
vision, his spirit a passionately energized command of the 
forces of justice." 

Challenge was succeeded by These Times (1917), evidently 
an " interval " book which, lacking the concentration and unity 
of the better known collection, sought (not always successfully) 
for larger horizons. Certain poems (like "Swimmers," "The 
Laughers " and the colloquial sonnets) stand out, but as a 
whole it has neither the energy of his earlier nor the surety of 
his later work. The New Adam (1920) is a more satisfactory 
unit; here the varied passions are fused in a new heat. 

Besides this serious poetry, Untermeyer has published two 

volumes of critical parodies, " and Other Poets" (1917) 

and Including Horace (1919) — paraphrases of the Latin bard 
as various classic and modern poets might have rendered him. 
He has also printed a strict metrical translation of three hun- 
dred and twenty-five Poems of Heinrich Heine (i9i7),' a vol- 
ume of prose criticism. The New Era in American Poetry 
(1919) ; and two text-books. He was one of the Associate 
Editors of The Seven Arts (1916-17) and has lectured at 
various universities in the Eastern States. 



306 



Louis Uniermeyer 

SUMMONS 

The eager night and the impetuous winds, 
The hints and whispers of a thousand lures, 
And all the swift persuasion of the Spring, 
Surged from the stars and stones, and swept me on . 
The smell of honeysuckles, keen and clear. 
Startled and shook me, with the sudden thrill 
Of some well-known but half-forgotten voice. 
A slender stream became a naked sprite, 
Flashed around curious bends, and winked at me 
Beyond the turns, alert and mischievous. 
A saffron moon, dangling among the trees. 
Seemed .like a toy balloon caught in the boughs, 
Flung there in sport by some too-mirthful breeze . 
And as it hung there, vivid and unreal. 
The whole world's lethargy was brushed away; 
The night kept tugging at my torpid mood 
And tore it into shreds. A warm air blew 
My wintry slothfulness beyond the stars; 
And over all indifference there streamed 
A myriad urges in one rushing wave . . . 
Touched with the lavish miracles of earth, 
I felt the brave persistence of the grass; 
The far desire of rivulets; the keen. 
Unconquerable fervor of the thrush; 
The endless labors of the patient worm; 
The lichen's strength ; the prowess of the ant ; 
The constancy of flowers ; the blind belief 
Of ivy climbing slowly toward the sun, 
307 



Louis Untermeyer 

The eternal struggles and eternal deaths — 
And yet the groping faith of every root! 
Out of old graves arose the cry of life; 
Out of the dying came the deathless call. 
And, thrilling with a new sweet restlessness, 
The thing that was my boyhood woke in me — 
Dear, foolish fragments made me strong again ; 
Valiant adventures, dreams of those to come. 
And all the vague, heroic hopes of youth. 
With fresh abandon, like a fearless laugh. 
Leaped up to face the heaven's unconcern. . . . 

And then — veil upon veil was torn aside — 
Stars, like a host of merry girls and boys. 
Danced gaily 'round me, plucking at my hand ; 
The night, scorning its stubborn mystery. 
Leaned down and pressed new courage in my heart; 
The hermit-thrush, throbbing with more than Song, 
Sang with a happy challenge to the skies; 
Love and the faces of a world of children 
Swept like a conquering army through my blood. 
And Beauty, rising out of all its forms, 
Beauty, the passion of the universe. 
Flamed with its joy, a thing too great for tears. 
And, like a wine, poured itself out for me 
To drink of, to be warmed with, and to go 
Refreshed and strengthened to the ceaseless fight; 
To meet with confidence the cynic years; 
Battling in wars that never can be won. 
Seeking the lost cause and the brave defeat. 
308 



Louis Untermeyer 

CALIBAN IN THE COAL MINES 

God, we don't like to complain 

We know that the mine is no lark — 

But — there's the pools from the rain; 
But — there's the cold and the dark. 

God, You don't know what it is — 
You, in Your well-lighted sky — 

Watching the meteors whizz; 
Warm, with the sun always by. 

God, if You had but the moon 
Stuck in Your cap for a lamp, 

Even You'd tire of it soon, 

Down in the dark and the damn. 

Nothing but blackness above 

And nothing that moves but the cars. 
God, if You wish for our love, 

Fling us a handful of stars! 



SWIMMERS 

I took the crazy short-cut to the bay; 
Over a fence or two and through a hedge. 
Jumping a private road, along the edge 
Of backyards full of drying wash it lay. 

309 



Louis Untermeyer 

I ran, electric with elation, 

Sweating, impetuous and wild 

For a swift plunge in the sea that smiled, 

Quiet and luring, half a mile away. 

This was the final thrill, the last sensation 

That capped four hours of violence and laughter: 

To have, with casual friends and casual jokes, 

Hard sport, a cold swim and fresh linen after . . . 

And now, the last set being played and over, 

I hurried past the ruddy lakes of clover; 

I swung my racket at astonished oaks, 

My arm still tingling from aggressive strokes. 

Tennis was over for the day — 

I took the leaping short-cut to the bay. 

Then the swift plunge into the cool, green dark — 

The windy waters rushing past me, through me; 

Filled with a sense of some heroic lark, 

Exulting in a vigor clean and roomy. 

Swiftly I rose to meet the feline sea 

That sprang upon me with a hundred claws. 

And grappled, pulled me down and played with me. 

Then, tense and breathless in the tightening pause 

When one wave grows into a toppling acre, 

I dived headlong into the foremost breaker; 

Pitting against a cold and turbulent strife 

The feverish intensity of life. 

Out of the foam I lurched and rode the wave, 
Swimming, hand over hand, against the wind; 
310 



Louis Untermeyer 

I felt the sea's vain pounding, and I grinned 
Knowing I was its master, not its slave. 
Oh, the proud total of those lusty hours — 
The give and take of rough and vigorous tussles 
With happy sinews and rejoicing muscles; 
The knowledge of my own miraculous powers, 
Feeling the force in one small body bent 
To curb and tame this towering element. 

Back on the curving beach I stood again. 
Facing the bath-house, when a group of men, 
Stumbling beneath some sort of weight, went by. 
I could not see the hidden thing they carried ; 
I only heard: "He never gave a cry" — 
"Who's going to tell her?" — "Yes, and they just 

married " — 
" Such a good swimmer, too." . . . And then they passed ; 
Leaving the silence throbbing and aghast. 

A moment there my buoyant heart hung slack, 

And then the glad, barbaric blood came back 

Singing a livelier tune; and in my pulse 

Beat the great wave that surges and exults. . . . 

Why I was there and whither I must go 

I did not care. Enough for me to know 

The same unresting struggle and the glowing 

Beauty of spendthrift hours, bravely showing 

Life, an adventure perilous and gay; 

And Death, a long and vivid holiday. 



3" 



Louis Untermeyer 



HANDS 

Strange, how this smooth and supple joint can be 

Put to so many purposes. It checks 
And rears the monsters of machinery 

And shapes the idle gallantries of sex. 

Those hands that light the fuse and dig the trap, 
Fingers that spin the earth or plunge through shame — 

And yours, that lie so lightly in your lap. 
Are only blood and dust — all are the same. 

What mastery directs them through the world 
And gives these delicate bones so great a power? 

You drop your head. You sleep. Your hands are curled 
Loosely, like some half-opened, perfumed flower. 

An hour ago they burned in mine and sent 

Armies with banners charging through my veins. 

Now they are cool and white; they rest content, 
Curved in a smile. The mystery remains. 



A SIDE STREET 

On the warm Sunday afternoons 
And every evening in the Spring and Summer 
When the night hurries the late home-comer 
And the air grows softer, and scraps of tunes 
Float from the open windows and jar 
Against the voices of children and the hum of a car; 
312 



Louis TJntermeyer 

When the city noises commingle and melt 

With a restless something half-seen, half-felt — 

I see them always there, 

Upon the low, smooth wall before the church; 

That row of little girls who sit and stare 

Like sparrows on a granite perch. 

They come in twittering couples or walk alone 

To their gray bough of stone, 

Sometimes by twos and threes, sometimes as many as five- 

But always they sit there on the narrow coping 

Bright-eyed and solemn, scarcely hoping 

To see more than what is merely moving and alive. . . 

They hear the couples pass; the lisp of happy feet 

Increases and the night grows suddenly sweet. . . . 

Before the quiet church that smells of death 

They sit. 

And Life sweeps past them with a rushing breath 

And reaches out and plucks them by the hand 

And calls them boldly, whispering to each 

In some strange speech 

They tremble to but cannot understand. 

It thrills and troubles them, as one by one, 

The days run off like water through a sieve; 

While, with a gaze as candid as the sun. 

Poignant and puzzled and inquisitive, 

They come and sit, — 

A part of life and yet apart from it. 



313 



Jean Starr Untermeyer 

Jean Starr was born at Zanesville, Ohio, May 13, i886, and 
educated at the Putnam Seminary in the city of her birth. At 
sixteen, she came to New York City, pursuing special studies at 
Columbia. In 1907 she married Louis Untermeyer and, al- 
though she had written some prose previous to the poetic 
renascence, her first volume was published more than ten years 
later. 

Growing Pains (191 8) is a thin book of thirty-four poems, 
the result of eight years slow and self-critical creation. This 
careful and highly selective process does much to bring the 
volume up to an unusually high level; a severity of taste and 
standards maintain the poet on the same austere plane. Per- 
fection is almost a passion with her; the first poem in the book 
declares: 

I would rather work in stubborn rock 
All the years of ray life ; 
And make one strong thing 
And set it in a high, clean place, 
To recall the granite strength of ray desire. 
Acutely self-analytical, there is a stern, uncoraproraising re- 
lentlessness toward her introspections that keeps them from 
being wistful or pathetic. These poems are, as she explains in 
her title-poem — 

No songs for an idle lute, 
No pretty tunes of coddled ills. 
But the bare chart of my growing pains. 
Intellect is always in the ascendency, even in the most 
ecstatic verses. In an almost religious poem, "A Man" (dedi- 
cated to her father), she pictures herself as a child, and 
expresses the whole psychology of our juvenile love of poor 
literature in lines like: 

A book held gaping on my knees, 
Watering a sterile romance with my thoughts. 
But it is not only her keen search for truth and an equally 
keen eye for the exact word that make these poems distinctive. 

314 



Jean Starr Untermeyer 

A sharp color sense, a surprising whimsicality, a translation o!? 
the ordinary in terms of the beautiful, illumine such poems as 
" Sinfonia Domestica," " Clothes," " Autumn." In the last 
named, with its brilliant combination of painting and house- 
wifery, Mrs. Untermeyer has reproduced her early environ- 
ment with a bright pungency; " Verhaeren's Flemish genre pic- 
tures are no better," writes Amy Lowell. Several of her purely 
pictorial poems establish a swift kinship between the most 
romantic and most prosaic objects. The tiny " Moonrise " is 
an example; so is " High Tide," that, in one extended metaphor, 
turns the mere fact of a physical law into a most arresting 
and noble fancy. 

Dreams Out of Darkness {1921) is a ripening of this author's 
powers with a richer musical undercurrent. This increase of 
melody is manifest on every page, possibly most striking in 
" Lake Song," which, beneath its symbolism, is one of the most 
liquid unrhymed lyrics of the period. 

HIGH TIDE 
I edged back against the night. 
The sea growled assault on the wave-bitten shore. 
And the breakers, 
Like young and impatient hounds, 
Sprang with rough joy on the shrinking sand. 
Sprang — but were drawn back slowly 
With a long, relentless pull, 
Whimpering, into the dark. 

Then I saw who held them captive; 
And I saw how they were bound 
With a broad and quivering leash of light, 
Held by the moon, 
As, calm and unsmiling, 
She walked the deep fields of the sky. 
315 



Jean Starr Untermeyer 
AUTUMN 

(To My Mother) 

How memory cuts away the years, 
And how clean the picture comes 
Of autumn days, brisk and busy; 
Charged with keen sunshine. 
And you, stirred with activity, 
The spirit of those energetic days. 

There was our back-yard. 

So plain and stripped of green. 

With even the weeds carefully pulled away 

From the crooked red bricks that made the walk. 

And the earth on either side so black. 

Autumn and dead leaves burning in the sharp air. 
And winter comforts coming in like a pageant. 
I shall not forget them: — 
Great jars laden with the raw green of pickles, 
Standing in a solemn row across the back of the porch, 
Exhaling the pungent dill; 
And in the very centre of the yard. 

You, tending the great catsup kettle of gleaming copper. 
Where fat, red tomatoes bobbed up and down 
Like jolly monks in a drunken dance. 
And there were bland banks of cabbages that came by 
the wagon-load, 

316 



Jean Starr Untermeyer 

Soon to be cut into delicate ribbons 

Only to be crushed by the heavy, wooden stompers. 

Such feathery whiteness — to come to kraut! 

And after, there were grapes that hid their brightness 
under a grey dust, ' 

Then gushed thrilling, purple blood over the fire; 

And enamelled crab-apples that tricked with their fra- 
grance 

But were bitter to taste. 

And there were spicy plums and ill-shaped quinces, 

And long string beans floating in pans of clear water 

Like slim, green fishes. 

And there was fish itself. 

Salted, silver herring from the city. . . . 

And you moved among these mysteries, 

Absorbed and smiling and sure; 

Stirring, tasting, measuring, 

With the precision of a ritual. 

I like to think of you in your years of power — 

You, now so shaken and so powerless — 

High priestess of your home. 



SINFONIA DOMESTICA 

When the white wave of a glory that is hardly I 
Breaks through my mind and washes it clean, 

I know at last the meaning of my ecstasy, 
And know at last my wish and what it can mean. 
317 



Jean Starr Untermeyer 

To have sped out of life that night — to have vanished 
Not as a vision, but as something touched, yet grown 

Radiant as the moonlight, circling my naked shoulder; 
Wrapped in a dream of beauty, longed for, but never 
known. 

For how with our daily converse, even the sweet sharing 
Of thoughts, of food, of home, of common life. 

How shall I be that glory, that last desire 

For which men struggle? Is Romance in a wife? 

Must I bend a heart that is bowed to breaking 

With a frustration, inevitable and slow. 
And bank my flame to a low hearth fire, believing 

You'll come for warmth and life to its tempered glow? 

Shall I mould my hope anew, to one of service, 
And tell my uneasy soul " Behold, this is good." 

And meet you (if we do meet) , even at Heaven's threshold, 
With ewer and basin, with clothing and with food ? 

LAKE SONG 

The lapping of lake water 
Is like the weeping of women. 
The weeping of ancient women 
Who grieved without rebellion. 

The lake falls over the shore 
Like tears on their curven bosoms. 
Here is languid, luxurious wailing; 
The wailing of kings' daughters. 
318 



Jean Starr Untermeyer 

So do we ever cry, 

A soft, unmutinous crying, 

When we know ourselves each a princess 

Locked fast within her tower. 

The lapping of lake water 
Is like the weeping of women, 
The fertile tears of women 
That water the dreams of men. 

John Gould Fletcher 

John Gould Fletcher was born at Little Rock, Arkansas, 
January 3, 1886. He was educated at Phillips Academy 
(Andover, Massachusetts) and Harvard (1903-7) and, after 
spending several years in Massachusetts, moved to England, 
where, except for brief visits to the United States, he has lived 
ever since. 

In 1913, Fletcher published five tiny books of poems which 
he has referred to as "his literary wild oats," five small collec- 
tions of experimental and faintly interesting verse. Two years 
later, Fletcher appeared as a decidedly less conservative and 
far more arresting poet with Irradiations — Sand and Spray 
(1915). This volume is full of an extraordinary fancy; 
imagination riots through it, even though it is often a bloodless 
and bodiless imagination. It is crowded — even overcrowded — 
with aesthetic subtleties, a sort of brilliant and haphazard series 
of improvisations. 

In the following book. Goblins and Pagodas (1916), Fletcher 
carries his unrelated harmonies much further. Color dominates 
him; the ambitious set of eleven "color symphonies" is an 
elaborate design in which the tone as well as the thought is 
summoned by color-associations, sometimes closely related, 
sometimes far-fetched. " It contains," says Conrad Aiken in 
his appreciative chapter on Fletcher in Scepticisms, " little of 

319 



John Gould Fletcher 

the emotion which relates to the daily life of men and women. 
... It is a sort of absolute poetry, a poetry of detached 
waver and brilliance, a beautiful flowering of language alone — 
a parthenogenesis, as if language were fertilized by itself 
rather than by thought or feeling. Remove the magic of 
phrase and sound and there is nothing left: no thread of con- 
tinuity, no thought, no story, no emotion. But the magic of 
phrase and sound is powerful, and it takes one into a fantastic 
world." 

Meanwhile, Fletcher has been developing. After having ap- 
peared in the three Imagist anthologies, he sought for depths 
rather than surfaces. Beginning with his majestic " Lincoln," 
his work has had a closer relation to humanity; a moving 
mysticism speaks from The Tree of Life (1918), the more 
obviously native Granite and Breakers (1921) and the later 
uncollected poems. Although the unconscious too often dictates 
Fletcher's fantasies, a calm music dominates his shorter poems, a 
grave and subdued lyricism moves and enriches them. 

THE SWAN 
Under a wall of bronze, 
Where beeches dip and trail 
Their branches in the water; 
With red-tipped head and wings — 
A beaked ship under sail — 
There glides a single swan. 

Under the autumn trees 
He goes. The branches quiver, 
Dance in the wraith-like water. 
Which ripples beneath the sedge 
With the slackening furrow that glides 
In his wake when he is gone: 
The beeches bow dark heads. 
320 



John Gould Fletcher 

Into the windless dusk, 

Where in mist great towers stand 

Guarding a lonely sttand, 

That is bodiless and dim, 

He speeds with easy stride; 

And I would go beside. 

Till the low brown hills divide 

At last, for me and him. 



LONDON NIGHTFALL 

I saw the shapes that stood upon the clouds: 
And they were tiger-breasted, shot with light, 
And all of them, lifting long trumpets together, 
Blew over the city, for the night to come. 
Down in the street, we floundered in the mud ; 
Above, in endless files, gold angels came 
And stood upon the clouds, and blew their horns 
For night. 

Like a wet petal crumpled. 
Twilight fell soddenly on the weary city; 
The 'buses lurched and groaned. 
The shops put up their doors. 
But skywards, far aloft. 

The angels, vanishing, waved broad plumes of gold, 
Summoning spirits from a thousand hills 
To pour the thick night out upon the earth. 
321 



John Gould Fletcher 



DAWN 

Above the east horizon, 

The great red flower of the dawn 

Opens slowly, petal by petal; 

The trees emerge from darkness 

With ghostly silver leaves, 

Dew powdered. 

Now consciousness emerges 

Reluctantly out of tides of sleep; 

Finding with cold surprise 

No strange new thing to match its dreams, 

But merely the familiar shapes 

Of bedpost, window-pane, and wall. 

Within the city, 

The streets which were the last to fall to sleep. 

Hold yet stale fragments of the night. 

Sleep oozes out of stagnant ash-barrels, 

Sleep drowses over litter in the streets. 

Sleep nods upon the milkcans by back doors. 

And, in shut rooms, 

Behind the lowered window-blinds. 

Drawn white faces unwittingly flout the day. 

But, at the edges of the city. 
Sleep is already washed away; 
Light filters through the moist green leaves, 
It runs into the cups of flowers, 
322 



John Gould Fletcher 

It leaps in sparks through drops of dew, 

It whirls against the window-panes 

With waking birds; 

Blinds are rolled up and chimneys smoke, 

Feet clatter past in silent paths, 

And down white vanishing ways of steel, 

A dozen railway trains converge 

Upon night's stronghold. 



LINCOLN * 



Like a gaunt, scraggly pine 

Which lifts its head above the mournful sandhills; 
And patiently, through dull years of bitter silence, 
Untended and uncared for, begins to grow. 

Ungainly, labouring, huge, 

The wind of the north has twisted and gnarled its 

branches ; 
Yet in the heat of midsummer days, when thunder-clouds 

ring the horizon, 
A nation of men shall rest beneath its shade. 

And it shall protect them all, 

Hold everyone safe there, watching aloof in silence; 
Until at last one mad stray bolt from the zenith 
Shall strike it in an instant down to earth. 
*See pages 51, 114, 123, 232, 245, 252. 
323 



John Gould Fletcher 

II 

There was a darkness in this man; an immense and hol- 
low darkness, 

Of which we may not speak, nor share with him, nor 
enter ; 

A darkness through which strong roots stretched down- 
wards into the earth 

Towards old things; 

Towards the herdman-kings who walked the earth and 
spoke with God, 

Towards the wanderers who sought for they knew not 
what, and found their goal at last; , 

Towards the men who waited, only waited patiently 
when all seemed lost. 

Many bitter winters of defeat; 

Down to the granite of patience 

These roots swept, knotted fibrous roots, prying, piercing, 
seeking, 

And drew from the living rock and the living waters 
about it 

The red sap to carry upwards to the sun. 



Not proud, but humble. 

Only to serve and pass on, to endure to the end through 

service ; 
For the ax is laid at the root of the trees, and all that 

bring not forth good fruit 
Shall be cut down on the day to come and cast into 

the fire. 

324 



John Gould Fletcher 

III 
There is silence abroad in the land to-day, 
And in the hearts of men, a deep and anxious silence ; 
And, because we are still at last, those bronze lips slowly 

open. 
Those hollow and weary eyes take on a gleam of light. 

Slowly a patient, firm-syllabled voice cuts through the 

endless silence 
Like labouring oxen that drag a plow through the chaos 

of rude clay-fields: 
" I went forward as the light goes forward in early 

spring, 
But there were also many things which I left behind. 

"Tombs that were quiet; 

One, of a mother, whose brief light went out in the 

darkness, 
One, of a loved one, the snow on whose grave is long 

falling. 
One, only of a child, but it was mine. 

" Have you forgot your graves ? Go, question them in 

anguish. 
Listen long to their unstirred lips. From your hostages 

to silence. 
Learn there is no life without death, no dawn without 

sun-setting. 
No victory but to Him who has given all." 

325 



John Gould Fletcher 

IV 

The clamour of cannon dies down, the furnace-mouth 

of the battle is silent. 
The midwinter sun dips and descends, the earth takes 

on afresh its bright colours. 
But he whom we mocked and obeyed not, he whom we 

scorned and mistrusted, 
He has descended, like a god, to his rest. 

Over the uproar of cities. 

Over the million intricate threads of life wavering and 
crossing, 

In the midst of problems we know not, tangling, per- 
plexing, ensnaring. 

Rises one white tomb alone. 

Beam over it, stars. 

Wrap it round, stripes — stripes red for the pain that he 

bore for you — 
Enfold it forever, O flag, rent, soiled, but repaired 

through your anguish; 
Long as you keep him there safe, the nations shall bow 

to your law. 

Strew over him flowers; 

Blue forget-me-nots from the north, and the bright pink 

arbutus 
From the east, and from the west rich orange blossoms. 
But from the heart of the land take the passion-flower. 
326 



John Gould Fletcher 

Rayed, violet, dim, 

With the nails that pierced, the cross that he bore and 
the circlet. 

And beside it there, lay also one lonely snow-white mag- 
nolia, 

Bitter for remembrance of the healing which has passed. 

THE SKATERS 

Black swallows swooping or gliding 

In a flurry of entangled loops and curves; 

The skaters skim over the frozen river. 

And the grinding click of their skates as they impinge 

upon the surface. 
Is like the brushing together of thin wing-tips of silver. 

"H. D." 

Hilda Doolittle was born September lo, 1886, at Bethlehem, 
Pennsylvania. When she was still a child, her father became 
Director of the Flower Observatory and the family moved to 
a suburb in the outskirts of Philadelphia. Hilda Doolittle at- 
tended a private school in West Philadelphia ; entered Bryn 
Mawr College in 1904; and went abroad, for what was in- 
tended to be a short sojourn, in 1911. After a visit to Italy 
and France, she came to London, joining Ezra Pound and 
"helping to organize the Imagists. Her work (signed " H. D.") 
began to appear in a few magazines and its unusual quality 
was recognized at once. She married one of the most talented 
of the English members of this group (Richard Aldington) in 
1913 and remained in London, creating, through a chiseled 
verse, her pure and flawless reproductions of Greek poetry and 

327 



"H. D." 

sculpture. In 1920, she made her long-deferred visit to Amer- 
ica, settling on the Californian coast, returning, the following 
year, to England. 

" H. D." is, by all odds, the most important of her group. 
She is the only one who has steadfastly held to the letter as 
well as the spirit of its credo. She is, in fact, the only true 
Imagist. Her poems, capturing the firm delicacy of the Greek 
models, are like a set of Tanagra figurines. Here, at first 
glance, the effect is chilling — beauty seems held in a frozen 
gesture. But it is in this very fixation of light, color and emo- 
tion that she achieves intensity. What, at first, seemed static 
becomes fluent; the arrested moment glows with brimming 
energy. 

Observe the poem entitled " Heat." Here, in the fewest 
possible words, is something beyond the description of heat — 
here is the effect of it. In these lines one feels the very weight 
and solidity of a midsummer afternoon. 

Her efforts to draw the contemporary world are less happy. 
She is best in her reflections of clear-cut loveliness in a quietly 
pagan world. Her art, in its precision and polish, is curiously 
Hellenic; " H. D.," in most of her moods, seems less of a con- 
temporary than an inspired anachronism. 



OREAD 

Whirl up, sea — 

Whirl your pointed pines. 

Splash your great pines 

On our rocks. 

Hurl your green over us — 

Cover us with your pools of fir. 



328 



"H. D." 

PEAR TREE 

Silver dust 

lifted from the earth, 

higher than my arms reach, 

you have mounted. 

O silver, 

higher than my arms reach 

you front us with great mass; 

no flower ever opened 
so staunch a white leaf, 
no flower ever parted silver 
from such rare silver; 

O white pear, 

your flower-tufts, 

thick on the branch, 

bring summer and ripe fruits 

in their purple hearts. 

HEAT 

O wind, rend open the heat, 
cut apart the heat, 
rend it to tatters. 

Fruit cannot drop 
through this thick air — 
fruit cannot fall into heat 
that presses up and blunts 
329 



"H. D." 

the points of pears 
and rounds the grapes. 

Cut through the heat — 
plough through it, 
turning it on either side 
of your path. 



LETHE 

Nor skin nor hide nor fleece 

Shall cover you, 
Nor curtain of crimson nor fine 
Shelter of cedar-wood be over you, 

Nor the fir-tree 

Nor the pine. 

Nor sight of whin nor gorse 

Nor river-yew. 

Nor fragrance of flowering bush. 
Nor wailing of reed-bird to waken you. 

Nor of linnet 

Nor of thrush. 

Nor word nor touch nor sight 

Of lover, you 
Shall long through the night but for this: 
The roll of the full tide to cover you 

Without question. 

Without kiss. 
330 



William Rose Benet 

William Rose Benet was born at Fort Hamilton, New York 
Harbor, February 2, i886. He was educated at Albany Acad- 
emy and graduated from Yale in 1907. After various experi- 
ences as free-lance writer, publisher's reader, magazine editor 
and second lieutenant in the U. S. Air Service, Benet became 
the Associate Editor of the New York Post's Literary Review in 
1920. 

The outstanding feature of Benet's verse is its extraordinary 
whimsicality; an oriental imagination riots through his pages. 
Like the title-poem of his first volume, Merchants from Cathay 
(1913), all of Benet's volumes vibrate with a vigorous music; 
they are full of the sonorous stuff that one rolls out crossing 
wintry fields or tramping a road alone. 

But Benet's charm is not confined to the lift and swing of 
rollicking choruses. His The Falconer of God (1914), The 
Great White Wall (1916) and The Burglar of the Zodiac 
(1918) contain decorations as bold as they are brilliant; they 
ring with a strange and spicy music evoked from seemingly 
casual words; they glow with a half-lurid, half-humorous 
reflection of the grotesque. There are times when Benet seems 
to be forcing his ingenuity. The poet frequently lets his fan- 
tastic Pegasus run away with him, and what started out to be 
a gallop among the stars ends in a scraping of shins on the 
pavement. But he is saved by an acrobatic dexterity even when 
his energy betrays him. 

Moons of Grandeur (1920) represents the fullest development 
of Benet's unusual gifts; a combination of Eastern phantasy and 
Western vigor. 

MERCHANTS FROM CATHAY 

How that Their heels slapped their bumping mules; 

They came. i • ,- 1 i 1 

their tat chaps glowed. 
Glory unto Mary, each seemed to wear 
a crown! 
331 



William Rose Benet 



Of their 
Beasts, 



And their 
Boast, 



With its 
Burthen 



Like sunset their robes were on the wide, 
white road: 
So we saw those mad merchants come 
dusting into town! 

Two paunchy beasts they rode on and two 
they drove before. 
May the Saints all help us, the tiger- 
stripes they had! 
And the panniers upon them swelled full 
of stuffs and ore ! 
The square buzzed and jostled at a sight 
GO mad. 

They bawled in their beards, and their 
turbans they wried. 
They stopped by the stalls with curvet- 
ting and clatter. 
As bronze as the bracken their necks and 
faces dyed — 
And a stave they sat singing, to tell us 
of the matter. 

"For your silks, to Sugarmago! For your 
dyes J to Isfahan! 
Weird fruits from the Isle o' Lamaree. 
But for magic merchandise. 
For treasure-trove and spice. 
Here's a catch and a carol to the great, 
grand Chan, 
The King of all the Kings across the 
sea! 
532 



William Rose Benet 



And 
Chorus. 



A first 

Stave 

Fearsome^ 



And a second 
Right hard 
To stomach 



And a third. 
Which is a 
Laughable 
Thing. 



"Here's a catch and a carol to the great, 
grand Chan; 

For we won through the deserts to his sun- 
set barbican; 

And the mountains of his palace no Titan's 
reach may span 
Where he wields his seignorie! 

" Red-as-blood skins of Panthers, so bright 
against the sun 
On the walls of the halls where his pil- 
lared state is set 
They daze with a blaze no man may look 
upon. 
And with conduits of beverage those 
floors run wet. 

" His wives stiff with riches, they sit be- 
fore him there. 
Bird and beast at his feast make song 
and clapping cheer. 
And jugglers and enchanters, all walking 
on the air, 
Make fall eclipse and thunder — make 
moons and suns appear! 

" Once the Chan, by his enemies sore- 
prest, and sorely spent, 
Lay, so they say, in a thicket 'neath a tree 
Where the howl of an owl vexed his foes 
from their intent: 
Then that fowl for a holy bird of rev- 
erence made he ! 
333 



William. Rose Benet 



We gape to 
Hear them end, 



"A catch and a carol to the great, grand 
Chan! 

Pastmasters of disasters, our desert caravan 

Won through all peril to his sunset bar- 
bican. 
Where he wields his seignorie! 

And crowns he gave us! We end where 
we began: 

A catch and a carol to the great, grand 
Chan, 
The King of all the Kings across the 



And are in 
Terror, 



Those mad, antic Merchants! . . . Their 
striped beasts did beat 
The market-square suddenlj' with hooves 
of beaten gold ! 
The ground yawned gaping and flamed 
beneath our feet! 
They plunged to Pits Abysmal with their 
wealth untold! 



And dread 

it is 
Devil's Work! 



And some say the Chan himself in anger 
dealt the stroke — 

For sharing of his secrets with silly, com- 
mon folk: 

But Holy, Blessed Mary, preserve us as 
you may 

Lest once more those mad Merchants come 
chanting from Cathay! 
334 



William Rose Benet 



NIGHT 1 

Let the night keep 
What the night takes, 
Sighs buried deep, 
Ancient heart-aches. 
Groans of the lover, 
Tears of the lost; 
Let day discover not 
All the night cost! 

Let the night keep 
Love's burning bliss. 
Drowned in deep sleep 
Whisper and kiss, 
Thoughts like white flowers 
In hedges of May; 
Let such deep hours not 
Fade with the day! 

Monarch is night 

Of all eldest things, 

Pain and affright, 

Rapturous wings; 

Night the crown, night the sword 

Lifted to smite. 

Kneel to your overlord. 

Children of night! 

1 From Moons of Grandeur by William Rose Benet. Copy- 
right, 1920, George H. Doran Company, Publishers. 

335 



William Rose Benet 

HOW TO CATCH UNICORNS 

Its cloven hoofprint on the sand 
Will lead you — ^where? 
Into a phantasmagoric land — 
Beware ! 

There all the bright streams run up-hill. 
The birds on every tree are still. 
But from stocks and stones, clear voices come 
That should be dumb. 

If you have taken along a net, 

A noose, a prod. 

You'll be waiting in the forest yet . . . 

Nid — nod! 

In a virgin's lap the beast slept sound, 
They say . . . but I — 
I think (Is anyone around?) 
That's just a lie! 

If you have taken a musketoon 
To flinders 'twill flash 'neath the wizard moon. 
So I should take browned batter-cake, 
Hot-buttered inside, like foam to flake. 

And I should take an easy heart 
And a whimsical face, 
And a tied-up lunch of sandwich and tart, 
And spread a cloth in the open chase. 
336 



William Rose Benet 
And then I should pretend to snore . . . 

And I'd hear a snort and I'd hear a roar, 
The wind of a mane and a tail, and four 
Wild hoofs prancing the forest-floor. 

And I'd open my eyes on a flashing horn — 
And see the Unicorn! 

Paladins fierce and virgins sweet . . . 

But he's never had anything to eat! 

Knights have tramped in their iron-mong'ry . . . 

But nobody thought — that's all! — he's hungry! 

ADDENDUM 

Really hungry! Good Lord deliver us, 
The Unicorn is not carnivorous! 

John Hall Wheelock 

John Hall Wheelock was born at Far Rockaway, Long Island, 
in i886. He was graduated from Harvard, receiving his 
B.A. in 1908, and finished his studies at the Universities of 
Gottingen and Berlin, 1908-10. 

Wheelock's first book is, in many respects, his best. The 
Human Fantasy (1911) sings with the voice of youth — a youth 
which is vibrantly, even vociferously, in love with existence. 
Rhapsodic and obviously influenced by Whitman and Henley, 
these lines beat bravely; a singing buoyance, arrests one upon 
opening the volume. A headlong ecstasy rises from pages 
whose refain is " Splendid it is to live and glorious to die." 
The Beloved Adventure (1912) is less powerful but scarcely 

337 



John Hall Wheelock 

less passionate. Lyric after lyric moves one by its athletic 
music and spiritual intensity. 

Wheelock's subsequent volumes are less individualized. Love 
and Liberation (1913) and Dust and Light (1919) are long dilu- 
tions of the earlier strain. The music is still here, but most 
of the magic has gone. Wheelock has allowed himself to be 
exploited by his own fluency, and the result is unbelievably 
montonous. Yet even vast stretches of two hundred and thirty 
unvaried love-songs cannot bury a dozen or more vivid poems 
which lie, half-concealed, in a waste of verbiage. 

In spite of his lapses and lack of selective taste, Wheelock 
is often a stirring lyricist. The Human Fantasy is one of the 
most remarkable " first " books of the period. 



SUNDAY EVENING IN THE COMMON 

Look — on the topmost branches of the world 
The blossoms of the myriad stars are thick; 
Over the huddled rows of stone and brick, 

A few, sad wisps of empty smoke are curled 
Like ghosts, languid and sick. 

One breathless moment now the city's moaning 
Fades, and the endless streets seem vague and dim ; 
There is no sound around the whole world's rim, 

Save in the distance a small band is droning 
Some desolate old hymn. 

Van Wyck, how often have we been together 
When this same moment made all mysteries clear; 
—The infinite stars that brood above us here, 

And the gray city in the soft June weather, 
So tawdry and so dear! 
338 



John Hall Wheelock 



BEAUTY 

The old, familiar Beaut)', 

Caressed by the world's dead hands, 
Beauty, so old and \^eary. 
Beloved of a thousand lovers. 
Worn with a thousand kisses, 
Surprising — beneficent — holy — 

Comes to us all in the end. 



LOVE AND LIBERATION 

Lift your arms to the stars 
And give an immortal shout; 
Not all the veils of darkness 
Can put your beauty out! 

You are armed with love, with love, 
Nor all the powers of Fate 
Can touch you with a spear, 
Nor all the hands of hate. 

What of good and evil. 
Hell and Heaven above — , 
Trample them with love! 
Ride over them with love! 



339 



John Hall Wheelock 

NIRVANA 

Sleep on, I lie at heaven's high oriels, 

Over the stars that murmur as they go 
Lighting your lattice-window far below; 

And every star some of the glory spells 
Whereof I know. 

I have forgotten you long, long ago, 

Liice the sweet silver singing of thin bells 

Vanished, or music fading faint and low. 
Sleep on, I lie at heaven's high oriels, 

Who loved you so. 

Joyce Kilmer 

(Alfred) Joyce Kilmer was born at New Brunswick, New 
Jersey, December 6, i886. He was graduated from Rutgers 
College in 1904 and received his A.B. from Columbia in 1906. 
After leaving Columbia he became, in rapid succession, in- 
structor of Latin at Morristown High School, editor of a 
journal for horsemen, book salesman, book-reviewer, lexicog- 
rapher, Esthete, interviewer, socialist and churchman. 

After Kilmer became converted to Catholicism, his concep- 
tion of the church was the Church Militant. " His thought," 
writes his biographer, Robert Cortes Holliday, " dwelt con- 
tinually on warrior-saints. ... As he saw it, there was no 
question as to his duty." In 1917 Kilmer joined the Officers' 
Reserve Training Corps, but he soon resigned from this. In 
less than three weeks after America entered the world war, 
he enlisted as a private in the Seventh Regiment, National 
Guard, New York. Shortly before the regiment left New York 
for Spartanburg, South Carolina, Kilmer was transferred at his 
340 



Joyce Kilmer 

own request to the 165th Infantry. In spite of his avowed 
militancy, Kilmer was "a poet trying to be a soldier;" he 
made no effort to glorify war; his one hope was to wring some 
spiritual satisfaction out of the brutality. 

On July 28, 1918, the five-day battle for the mastery of the 
heights beyond the river Ourcq was begun. Two days later, 
Sergeant Kilmer was killed in action. 

Death came before the poet had developed or even ma- 
tured his gifts. His first volume, Summer of Love (1911), is 
wholly imitative; it is full of reflections of a dozen other 
sources, " a broken bundle of mirrors." Trees and Other Poems 
(1914) contains the title-poem by which Kilmer is best known 
and, though various influences are still strong (one cannot miss 
the borrowed accents of Patmore, Belloc, Chesterton, Housman 
and — mde "Martin" — E. A. Robinson), a refreshing candor 
lights up the lines. Main Street and Other Poems (1917) is 
less derivative; the simplicity is less self-conscious, the ecstasy 
more spontaneous. 

Besides his own poetry, Kilmer edited a selection of Verses 
by Hilaire Belloc (1916) and Dreams and Images, An An- 
thology of Catholic poets (1917). 

TREES 1 

I think that I shall never see 
A poem lovely as a tree. 

A tree whose hungry mouth is prest 
Against the sweet earth's flowing breast; 

_A tree that looks at God all day, 
And lifts her leafy arms to pray; 

1 From Trees and Other Poems by Joyce Kilmer. Copy- 
right, 1914, by George H. Doran Company, Publishers. 

341 



Joyce Kilmer 

A tree that may in summer wear 
A nest of robins in her hair; 

Upon whose bosom snow has lain ; 
Who intimately lives with rain. 

Poems are made by fools like me, 
But only God can make a tree. 



MARTIN 1 

When I am tired of earnest men, 

Intense and keen and sharp and clever. 
Pursuing fame with brush or pen 

Or counting metal disks forever, 
Then from the halls of shadowland 

Beyond the trackless purple sea 
Old Martin's ghost comes back to stand 

Beside my desk and talk to me. 

Still on his delicate pale face 

A quizzical thin smile is showing. 
His cheeks are wrinkled like fine lace, 

His kind blue eyes are gay and glowing. 
He wears a brilliant-hued cravat, 

A suit to match his soft gray hair, 
A rakish stick, a knowing hat, 

A manner blithe and debonair. 

^ From Trees and Other Poems by Joyce Kilmer. Copy- 
right, 1914, by George H. Doran Company, Publishers. 
342 



Joyce Kilmer 

How good, that he who always knew 

That being lovely was a duty, 
Should have gold halls to wander through 

And should himself inhabit beauty. 
How like his old unselfish way 

To leave those halls of splendid mirth 
And comfort those condemned to stay 

Upon the bleak and sombre earth. 

Some people ask: What cruel chance 

Made Martin's life so sad a story? 
Martin? Why, he exhaled romance 

And wore an overcoat of glory. 
A fleck of sunlight in the street, 

A horse, a book, a girl who smiled, — 
Such visions made each moment sweet 

For this receptive, ancient child. 

Because it was old Martin's lot 

To be, not make, a decoration, 
Shall we then scorn him, having not 

His genius of appreciation? 
Rich joy and love he got and gave; 

His heart was merry as his dress. 
Pile laurel wreaths upon his grave 

Who did not gain, but was, success. 



343 



Shaemas O Sheel 

Shaemas O Sheel (Shields) was born September 19, 1886, in 
New York City. After graduating from high school, he revived 
the ancient Gaelic form of his family name and identified 
himself with the cause of Ireland in America. 

O Sheel's two volumes, The Blossomy Bough (1911) and 
The Light Feet of Goats (1915), owe their chief impetus to the 
Celtic renascence and to W. B. Yeats in particular. But 
O Sheel's poetry, although influenced, is not merely derivative. 
His ancestry speaks through hira with unmistakable accents; 
he is typically the Irish bard of whom Chesterton has written: 
For the great Gaels of Ireland 

Are the men that God made mad; 
For all their wars are merry 
And all their songs are sad. 
A recurring if sometimes too determined mysticism and a 
muffled heroism individualize the best of his work. 



THEY WENT FORTH TO BATTLE, BUT 
THEY ALWAYS FELL 

They went forth to battle, but they always fell; 

Their eyes were fixed above the sullen shields; 
Nobly they fought and bravely, but not well 
And sank heart-wounded by a subtle spell. 

They knew not fear that to the foeman yields. 
They were not weak, as one who vainly wields 
A futile weapon; yet the sad scrolls tell 
How on the hard-fought field they always fell. 

It was a secret music that they heard, 
A sad sweet plea for pity and for peace; 
344 



Shaemas O Sheel 

And that which pierced the heart was but a word, 
Though the white breast was red-lipped where the sword 
Pressed a fierce cruel kiss, to put surcease 
On its hot thirst, but drank a hot increase. 
Ah, they by some strange troubling doubt were stirred. 
And died for hearing what no foeman heard. 

They went forth to battle, but they always fell; 

Their might was not the might of lifted spears; 
Over the battle-clamor came a spell 
Of troubling music, and they fought not well. 

Their wreaths are willows and their tribute, tears; 

Their names are old sad stories in men's ears; 
Yet they will scatter the red hordes of Hell, 
Who went to battle forth and always fell. 



Roy Helton 

Roy Helton was born at Washington, D. C, in 1886. He 
graduated from the University of Pennsylvania in 1908. He 
studied art — and found he was color-blind. He spent two years 
at inventions — and found he had no business sense. After a 
few more experiments, he became a schoolmaster in West 
Philadelphia. 

Helton's first volume, Youth's Pilgrimage (1915), is a strange, 
mystical affair, full of vague symbolism with a few purple 
patches. Outcasts in Beulah Land (1918) is entirely different 
in theme and treatment. This is a much starker verse ; a poetry 
of city streets, direct and sharp. 



345 



Roy Helton 



IN PASSING 

Through the dim window, I could see 
The little room — a sordid square 

Of helter-skelter penury: 

Piano, whatnot, splintered chair. . . 

It is so small a room that I 

Seem almost at the woman's side: 

Galled jade — too fat for vanity. 

And far too frankly old for pride. 

Her greasy apron 'round her waist; 

The dish cloth by her on the chair; 
As if in some wild headlong haste, 

She has come in and settled there. 

Grimly she bends her back and tries 
To stab the keys, with heavy hand; 

A child's first finger exercise 
Before her on the music stand. 



David Morton 

David Morton was born at Elkton, Kentucky, February 21, 
1886. He graduated from Vanderbilt University in 1909, en- 
gaging in newspaper work immediately thereafter. After ten 
years of writing for various papers in the South, Morton came 
to New Jersey, where he now lives, being teacher of English 
at Morristown High School. 

The greater part of Morton's work is in the sonnet form, a 
346 



David Morton 

form into which he has carried a new warmth without sacri- 
ficing the old dignity. The best of these verses are to be found 
in his first volume, Ships in Harbor and Other Poems. 

SYMBOLS 1 

Beautiful words, like butterflies, blow by. 

With what swift colors on their fragile wings! — 
Some that are less articulate than a sigh. 

Some that were names of ancient, lovely things. 
What delicate careerings of escape. 

When they would pass beyond the baffled reach, 
To leave a haunting shadow and a shape. 

Eluding still the careful traps of speech. 

And I who watch and listen, lie in wait, 
Seeing the cloudy cavalcades blow past, 

Happy if some bright vagrant, soon or late, 

May venture near the snares of sound, at last — 

Most fortunate captor if, from time to time, 

One may be talcen, trembling, in a rhyme. 



OLD SHIPS 

There is a memory stays upon old ships, 
A weightless cargo in the musty hold, — 

Of bright lagoons and prow-caressing lips, 
Of stormy midnights, — and a tale untold. 

^ Reprinted, by permission, from Poetry: A Magazine of 
Verse. 

347 



David Morton 

They have remembered islands in the dawn, 
And windy capes that tried their slender spars, 

And tortuous channels where their keels have gone. 
And calm blue nights of stillness and the stars. 

Ah, never think that ships forget a shore. 

Or bitter seas, or winds that made them wise; 

There is a dream upon them, evermore; 

And there be some who say that sunk ships rise 

To seek familiar harbors in the night, 

Blowing in mists, their spectral sails like light. 

Or rick Johns 

Orrick Johns was born at St. Louis, Missouri, in 1887. He 
schooled himself to be an advertising copy writer, his creative 
work being kept as an avocation. 

Asphalt and Other Poems (1917) is a queer mixture. Cheap 
stanzas crowd against lines of singular beauty; poor dialect 
verse elbows lyrics that sing without a false note. The same 
incongruity is evident in Black Branches (1920), where much 
that is strained and artificial mingles with poetry that is not 
only spontaneous but searching. At his best, notably in the 
refreshing " Country Rhymes," Johns is a true singer, a 
lyricist of no little stature. 

THE INTERPRETER 

In the very early morning when the light was low 
She got all together and she went like snow, 
Like snow in the springtime on a sunny hill, 
And we were only frightened and can't think still. 

348 



Orrick Johns 

We can't think quite that the katydids and frogs 
And the little crying chickens and the little grunting hogs, 
And the other living things that she spoke for to us 
Have nothing more to tell her since it happened thus. 

She never is around for any one to touch, 
But of ecstasy and longing she too knew much . . . 
And always when any one has time to call his own 
She will come and be beside him as quiet as a stone. 



LITTLE THINGS 

There's nothing very beautiful and nothing very gay 
About the rush of faces in the town by day; 
But a light tan cow in a pale green mead. 
That is very beautiful, beautiful indeed . . . 
And the soft March wind and the low March mist 
Are better than kisses in a dark street kissed . . . 
The fragrance of the forest when it wakes at dawn. 
The fragrance of a trim green village lawn, 
The hearing of the murmur of the rain at play — 
These things are beautiful, beautiful as day! 
And I shan't stand waiting for love or scorn 
When the feast is laid for a day new-born 
Oh, better let the little things I loved when little 
Return when the heart finds the great things brittle ; 
And better is a temple made of bark and thong 
Than a tall stone temple that may stand too long. 



349 



Margaret Widdemer 



Margaret Widdemer was born at Doylestown, Pennsylvania, 
and began writing in her childhood. After graduating from 
Drexel Institute Library School in 1909, she became a con- 
tributor of poems and short stories to various magazines — her 
first published poem ("The Factories") being widely quoted. 
She married Robert Haven Schauffler, the author, in August, 

1919- 

Miss Widdemer's poetic work has two distinct phases. In 
the one mood, she is the protesting poet, the champion of the 
down-trodden, the lyricist on fire with angry passion. In the 
other, she is the writer of well-made, polite and popular 
sentimental verse. Her finest poems are in Factories with Other 
Lyrics (1915), although several of her best songs are in The 
Old Road to Paradise (1918), which divided, with Sandburg's 
Cornhuskers, the Columbia Poetry Prize in 1918. 

Miss Widdemer is also the author of two books of short 
stories, four novels and several books for girls. 



FACTORIES 

I have shut my little sister in from life and light 

(For a rose, for a ribbon, for a wreath across my hair), 

I have made her restless feet still until the night. 

Locked from sweets of summer and from wild spring 
air; 

I who ranged the meadowlands, free from sun to sun, 
Free to sing and pull the buds and watch the far wings 

fly, 

I have bound my sister till her playing time was done — 
Oh, my little sister, was it I? Was it I? 
350 



Margaret Widdemer 

I have robbed my sister of her day of maidenhood 
(For a robe, for a feather, for a trinket's restless 
spark). 
Shut from love till dusk shall fall, how shall she know 
good, 
How shall she go scatheless through the sun-lit dark? 
I who could be innocent, I who could be gay, 

I who could have love and mirth before the light 
went by, 
I have put my sister in her mating-time away — 
Sister, my young sister, was it I? Was it I? 

I have robbed my sister of the lips against her breast, 

(For a coin, for the weaving of my children's lace 
and lawn), 
Feet that pace beside the loom, hands that cannot rest — 

How can she know motherhood, whose strength is gone? 
I who took no heed of her, starved and labor-worn, 

I, against whose placid heart my sleepy gold-heads lie, 
Round my path they cry to me, little souls unborn — 

God of Life! Creator! It was I! It was I! 



THE TWO DYINGS 

I can remember once, ere I was dead. 

The sorrow and the prayer and bitter cry 

When they who loved me stood around the bed. 
Watching till I should die: 
351 



Margaret yy laaemer 

They need not so have grieved their souls for me, 
Grouped statue-like to count my failing breath- 
Only one thought strove faintly, bitterly 
With the kind drug of Death: 

How once upon a time, unw^ept, unknown, 

Unhelped by pitying sigh or murmured prayer, 

My youth died in slow agony alone 
With none to watch or care. 

THE MODERN WOMAN TO HER LOVER 

I shall not lie to you any more. 

Flatter or fawn to attain my end — 

I am what never has been before, 
Woman — and Friend. 

I shall be strong as a man is strong, 

I shall be fair as a man is fair, 
Hand in locked hand we shall pass along 

To a purer air: 

I shall not drag at your bridle-rein. 

Knee pressed to knee we shall ride the hill; 

I shall not lie to you ever again — 
Will you love me still? 



Alan Seeger 

Alan Seeger was born in New York, June 22, 1888. When 
he was still a baby, his parents moved to Staten Island, where 
he remained through boyhood. Later, there were several other 
352 



Alan Seeger 

migrations, including a sojourn in Mexico, where Seeger spent 
the most impressionable years of his youth. In 1906, he entered 
Harvard; became one of the editors of the Harvard Monthly; 
returned to New York in 1910 and in 1913 set off for Paris — 
" a departing point," wrote William Archer, " which may 
fairly be called his Hegira, the turning point of his history." 
1914 came, and the European war had not entered its third 
week when, along with some forty of his fellow-countrymen, 
Seeger enlisted in the Foreign Legion of France. He was in 
action almost continually, serving on various fronts. On July i, 
1916, a new advance began; a few days later the Legion was 
ordered to clear the Germans out of the village of Belloy-en- 
Santerre. On the fourth of July, Seeger advanced in the first 
rush and his squad was practically wiped out by hidden 
machine-gun fire. Seeger fell, mortally wounded, and died the 
next morning. 

Seeger's literary promise was far greater than his poetic 
accomplishment. With the exception of his one famous poem, 
there is little of importance though much of charm in his 
collected Poems (published, with an Introduction by William 
Archer, in 1916). His letters from the front (published in 
1917) show a more powerful touch, a keener sense of per- 
ception. Had he lived a few years more, he might have been 
a valuable recorder of a changed and changing world. 

" I HAVE A RENDEZVOUS WITH DEATH " ^ 

I have a rendezvous -with. Death 

At some disputed barricade, 

When Spring comes back with rustling shade 

And apple-blossoms fill the air^ 

I have a rendezvous with Death 

When Spring brings back blue days and fair. 

1 From Poems by Alan Seeger. Copyright, 1916, by Charles 
Scribner's Sons. By permission of the publishers. 

353 



Alan Seeger 

It may be he shall take my hand 

And lead me into his dark land 

And close my eyes and quench my breath — 

It may be I shall pass him still. 

I have a rendezvous with Death 

On some scarred slope of battered hill, 

When Spring comes round again this year 

And the first meadow-flowers appear. 

God knows 'twere better to be deep 
Pillowed in silk and scented down, 
Where love throbs out in blissful sleep. 
Pulse nigh to pulse, and breath to breath. 
Where hushed awakenings are dear . . . 
But I've a rendezvous with Death 
At midnight in some flaming town, 
When Spring trips north again this year. 
And I to my pledged word am true, 
I shall not fail that rendezvous. 



Willard Wattles 

Willard (Austin) Wattles was born at Bayneville, Kansas, 
July 8, 1888. He received his A.B. at the University of Kansas 
in 1909 and, since 1910, has divided his time between teaching 
English and harvesting wheat. 

His first book was an anthology, Sunflowers: A Book of 
Kansas Poems (1914), to which he also contributed. Lanterns 
in Gethsemane (1918) consists, almost entirely, of mystical and 
religious poems. There is, however, little of the sermonizing 
unction and less cant in these fresh pages. There is an unusual 
354 



Willard Wattles 

vibrancy here; a warm buoyance that glows against its the- 
ological background. Many of Wattles's verses have the 
peculiar grace of a parable joined to a nursery rhyme; "The 
Builder," " Jericho " and a few others seem like scraps of the 
Scripture rendered by Mother Goose. 



THE BUILDER 1 

Smoothing a cypress beam 

With a scarred hand, 
I saw a carpenter 

In a far land. 

Down past the flat roofs 

Poured the white sun; 
But still he bent his back, 

The patient one. 

And I paused surprised 

In that queer place 
To find an old man 

With a haunting face. 

" Who art thou, carpenter. 

Of the bowed head ; 
And what buildest thou? " 

" Heaven," he said. 

1 Taken by permission from Lanterns in Gethsemane by 
Willard Wattles. Copyright, 1918, by E. P. Dutton & Co., 
New York. 

355 



Willard Wattles 

CREEDS 

How pitiful are little folk — 

They seem so very small; 

They look at stars, and think they are 

Denominational. 

T. S. Eliot 

Thomas Stearns Eliot, one of the most brilliant of the young 
expatriates, was born at St. Louis, Missouri, in 1888. He 
received his A.B. at Harvard in 1909 and his A.M. in 1910. 
Subsequently, he studied at the Sorbonne and at Merton College, 
Oxford, becoming a teacher and lecturer in London, where he 
has lived since 1913. 

Prufrock appeared in England in 1917. An American edition, 
including a number of other verses, was published under the 
title Poems in 1920. Eliot's early work is the more important; 
it is curious and sharply original. The exaltation which is the 
very breath of poetry is seldom present in Eliot's later lines. 
A certain perverse brilliance takes its place, an unearthly light 
without warmth which has the sparkle if not the strength of fire. 
It flickers mockingly through most of Eliot's sardonic pictures 
and shines with a bright pallor out of " The Love Song of J. 
Alfred Prufrock " and " Portrait of a Lady." These two long 
poems are the book's main exhibit; they are sensitive and 
psychologically probing. 

Eliot's ironic rhymed verses, which constitute the bulk of his 
work, are in his later style. It is this vein that tempts Eliot 
most — and is his own undoing. For irony, no matter how agile 
and erudite — and Eliot's is both — must contain heat if it is to 
burn. And heat is one of the few things that cannot be juggled 
by this acrobatic satirist. His lines, for the most part, are a 
species of mordant light verse; complex and disillusioned vers 
de societe. 

356 



T. S. Eliot 



MORNING AT THE WINDOW 

They are rattling breakfast plates in basement kitchens, 
And along the trampled edges of the street 
I am aware of the damp souls of housemaids 
Sprouting despondently at area gates. 

The brown waves of fog toss up to me 
Twisted faces from the bottom of the street, 
And tear from a passer-by with muddy skirts 
An aimless smile that hovers in the air 
And vanishes along the level of the roofs. 



FROM "THE LOVE SONG OF 
J. ALFRED PRUFROCK" 

The yellow fog that rubs its back upon the window-panes. 
The yellow smoke that rubs its muzzle on the window- 
panes, 
Licked its tongue into the corners of the evening, 
Lingered upon the pools that stand in drains. 
Let fall upon its back the soot that falls from chimneys. 
Slipped by the terrace, made a sudden leap. 
And, seeing that it was a soft October night. 
Curled once about the house, and fell asleep. 



357 



T. S. Eliot 



PRELUDE 

The winter evening settles down 

With smells of steaks in passageways. 

Six o'clock. 

The burnt-out ends of smoky days. 

And now a gusty shower wraps 

The grimy scraps 

Of withered leaves about his feet 

And newspapers from vacant lots; 

The showers beat 

On broken blinds and chimney pots, 

And at the corner of the street 

A lonely cab-horse steams and stamps. 

And then the lighting of the lamps. 

Conrad Aiken 

Conrad (Potter) Aiken was born at Savannah, Georgia, 
August 5, 1889. He attended Harvard, receiving his A.B. in 
1912, travelled extensively for three years, and since then, he 
has devoted all his time to literature, living at South Yarmouth, 
Massachusetts. 

The most outstanding feature of Aiken's creative ■work is its 
rapid adaptability and its slow growth. His first volume. 
Earth Triumphant and Other Tales in Verse (1914), is the 
Keats tradition crossed, paraphrased (and vulgarized) by 
Masefield. Turns and Movies (1916) is a complete change; 
Masefield is exchanged for Masters. But in the less conspicuous 
half of this book, Aiken begins to speak with his true voice. 
Here he is the natural musician, playing with new rhythms, 
haunting cadences. The Jig of Forslin (1916) is an elaboration 
358 



Conrad Aiken 

of his method. In this volume, Aiken goes back to the narra- 
tive — or rather, to a series of loosely connected stories — and, 
reinforced by studies in analytical psychology, explores " the 
process of vicarious wish fulfilment by which civilized man 
enriches his circumscribed life." 

Nocturne of Remembered Spring (1917), The Charnel Rose 
(1918) and The House of Dust (1920) are packed with a tired 
but often beautiful music. Even though much of it is enlivened 
by injections of T. S. Eliot's conversational idiom, the effect 
is often moony and montonous. Rain seems to fall persistently 
through these volumes; dust blows down the street, the shadows 
blur; everything dissolves in a mist of boredom and forgetful- 
ness. Even the poignance seems on the point of falling asleep. 

Often Aiken loses himself in this watery welter of language. 
In trying to create a closer liaison between poetry and 
music, he gives, too frequently, so much importance to the 
rise and fall of syllables that his very excess of music defeats 
his purpose. His verse, thus, gains greatly on the sensuous side 
but loses, in its cloying indefiniteness, that vitality and sharpness 
of speech which is the very blood of poetry. 

This weakening overinsistence on sound does not prevent 
Aiken from attaining many exquisite effects. Primarily, a 
lyric poet, he frequently condenses an emotion in a few lines; 
some of his best moments are these " lapses " into tune. The 
music of the Morning Song from " Senlin " (in The Charnel 
Rose) is rich with subtleties of rhythm. But it is much more 
than a lyrical movement. Beneath the flow and flexibility of 
these lines, there is a delightful whimsicality, an extraordinary 
summoning of the immensities that loom behind the casual mo- 
ments of everyday. And in " The Fulfilled Dream,'' Aiken can 
divert the stream of the subconscious, whose vague outlines he 
reproduces so well, to show the dream in its vivid strength. 

Besides his varied poetry, Aiken has written a quantity of 
criticism of contemporary poets, the best of his reviews having 
been published in Scepticisms (1919), a provocative and valua- 
ble series of studies. 

359 



Conrad Aiken 



CHANCE MEETINGS 

In the mazes of loitering people, the watchful and furtive, 
The shadows of tree-trunks and shadows of leaves, 
In the drowse of the sunlight, among the low voices, 
I suddenly face you. 

Your dark eyes return for a space from her who is with 

you. 
They shine into mine with a sunlit desire, 
They say an ' I love you, what star do you live on ? ' 
They smile and then darken, 

And silent, I answer ' You too — I have known you, — 

I love you! — ' 
And the shadows of tree-trunks and shadows of leaves 
Interlace with low voices and footsteps and sunlight 
To divide us forever. 



THE FULFILLED DREAM 

More towers must yet be built — more towers destroyed- 
Great rocks hoisted in air; 

And he must seek his bread in high pale sunlight 
With gulls about him, and clouds just over his eyes. . . 
And so he did not mention his dream of falling 
But drank his coffee in silence, and heard in his ears 
That horrible whistle of wind, and felt his breath 
Sucked out of him, and saw the tower flash by 
360 



Conrad Aiken 

And the small tree swell beneath him. . . . 
He patted his boy on the head, and kissed his wife, 
Looked quickly around the room, to remember it, — 
And so went out. . . . For once, he forgot his pail. 

Something had changed — but it was not the street — 
The street was just the same — it was himself. 
Puddles flashed in the sun. In the pawn-shop door 
The same old black cat winked green amber eyes; 
The butcher stood by his window tying his apron; 
The same men walked beside him, smoking pipes, 
Reading the morning paper. . . . 

He would not yield, he thought, and walk more slowly, 
As if he knew for certain he walked to death : 
But with his usual pace, — deliberate, firm. 
Looking about him calmly, watching the world. 
Taking his ease. . . . Yet, when he thought again 
Of the same dream, now dreamed three separate times. 
Always the same, and heard that whistling wind. 
And saw the windows flashing upward past him, — 
He slowed his pace a little, and thought with horror 
How monstrously that small tree thrust to meet him ! . . . 
He slowed his pace a little and remembered his wife. 

Was forty, then, too old for work like this? 
Why should it be? He'd never been afraid — 
His eye was sure, his hand was steady. . . . 
But dreams had meanings. 

361 



Conrad Aiken 

He walked more slowly, and looked along the roofs, 
All built by men, and saw the pale blue sky; 
And suddenly he was dizzy with looking at it, 
It seemed to whirl and swim, 

It seemed the color of terror, of speed, of death. . . . 
He lowered his eyes to the stones, he walked more slowly; 
His thoughts were blown and scattered like leaves; 
He thought of the pail. . . . Why, then, was it forgotten ? 
Because he would not need it? 

Then, just as he was grouping his thoughts again 

About that drug-store corner, under an arc-lamp. 

Where first he met the girl whom he would marry, — 

That blue-eyed innocent girl, in a soft blouse, — 

He waved his hand for signal, and up he went 

In the dusty chute that hugged the wall; 

Above the tree ; from girdered floor to floor ; 

Above the flattening roofs, until the sea 

Lay wide and waved before him. . . . And then he stepped 

Giddily out, from that security, 

To the red rib of iron against the sky. 

And walked along it, feeling it sing and tremble; 

And looking down one instant, saw the tree 

Just as he dreamed it was ; and looked away. 

And up again, feeling his blood go wild. 

— He gave the signal; the long girder swung 
Closer upon him, dropped clanging into place, 
Almost pushing him off. Pneumatic hammers 
Began their madhouse clatter, the white-hot rivets 
362 



Conrad Aiken 

Were tossed from below and deftly caught in pails; 
He signalled again, and wiped his mouth, and thought 
A place so high in the air should be more quiet. 
The tree, far down below, teased at his eyes. 
Teased at the corners of them, until he looked. 
And felt his body go suddenly small and light; 
Felt his brain float off like a dwindling vapor; 
And heard a whistle of wind, and saw a tree 
Come plunging up to him, and thought to himself, 
' By God — I'm done for now; the dream was right. . . 



MIRACLES 

Twilight is spacious, near things in it seem far. 
And distant things seem near. 
Now in the green west hangs a yellow star. 
And now across old waters you may hear 
The profound gloom of bells among still trees, 
Like a rolling of huge boulders beneath seas. 

Silent as thought in evening contemplation 
Weaves the bat under the gathering stars. 
Silent as dew, we seek new incarnation. 
Meditate new avatars. 
In a clear dusk like this 
Mary climbed up the hill to seek her son. 
To lower him down from the cross, and kiss 
The mauve wounds, every one. 
363 



Conrad Aiken 

Men with wings 

In the dusk walked softly after her. 

She did not see them, but may have felt 

The winnowed air around her stir; 

She did not see them, but may have known 

Why her son's body was light as a little stone. 

She may have guessed that other hands were there 

Moving the watchful air. 

Now, unless persuaded by searching music 

Which suddenly opens the portals of the mind, 

We guess no angels, 

And are contented to be blind. 

Let us blow silver horns in the twilight, 

And lift our hearts to the yellow star in the green. 

To find perhaps, if, while the dew is rising, 

Clear things may not be seen. 



MORNING SONG FROM " SENLIN " 

It is morning, Senlin says, and in the morning 
When the light drips through the shutters like the dew, 
I arise, I face the sunrise, 
And do the things my fathers learned to do. 
Stars in the purple dusk above the rooftops 
Pale in a saffron mist and seem to die. 
And I myself on a swiftly tilting planet 
Stand before a glass and tie my tie. 
364 



Conrad Aiken 

Vine-leaves tap my window, 
Dew-drops sing to the garden stones, 
The robin chirps in the chinaberry tree 
Repeating three clear tones. 

It is morning. I stand by the mirror 

And tie my tie once more. 

While waves far ofE in a pale rose twilight 

Crash on a white sand shore. 

I stand by a mirror and comb my hair: 

How small and white my face! — 

The green earth tilts through a sphere of air 

And bathes in a flame of space. 

There are houses hanging above the stars 

And stars hung under a sea . . . 

And a sun far off in a shell of silence 

Dapples my walls for me. . . . 

It is morning, Senlin says, and in the morning 
Should I not pause in the light to remember God? 
Upright and firm I stand on a star unstable. 
He is immense and lonely as a cloud. 
I will dedicate this moment before my mirror 
To him alone, for him I will comb my hair. 
Accept these humble offerings, clouds of silence! 
I will think of you as I descend the stair. 

Vine-leaves tap my window, 
The snail-track shines on the stones; 
Dew-drops flash from the chinaberry tree 
Repeating two clear tones. 

365 



Conrad Aiken 

It is morning, I awake from a bed of silence, 
Shining I rise from the starless waters of sleep. 
The walls are about me still as in the evening, 
I am the same, and the same name still I keep. 
The earth revolves with me, yet makes no motion. 
The stars pale silently in a coral sky. 
In a whistling void I stand before my mirror, 
Unconcerned, and tie my tie. 

There are horses neighing on far-off hills 
Tossing their long white manes. 
And mountains flash in the rose-white dusk, 
Their shoulders black with rains. . . . 
It is morning, I stand by the mirror 
And surprise my soul once more ; 
The blue air rushes above my ceiling. 
There are suns beneath my floor. . . . 

. . . It is morning, Senlin says, I ascend from darkness 
And depart on the winds of space for I know not where ; 
My watch is wound, a key is in my pocket, 
And the sky is darkened as I descend the stair. 
There are shadows across the windows, clouds in heaven, 
And a god among the stars; and I will go 
Thinking of him as I might think of daybreak 
And humming a tune I know. . . . 

Vine-leaves tap at the window. 
Dew-drops sing to the garden stones. 
The robin chirps in the chinaberry tree 
Repeating three clear tones. 

366 



Christopher Morley 

Christopher (Darlington) Morley was born at Haverford, 
Pennsylvania, May 5, 1890. He graduated from Haverford 
College in 1910 and was Rhodes Scholar at New College, Ox- 
ford, England, 1910-13. 

Since 1914 he has been on the staff of various periodicals, 
coming to New York in 1920 to run his column (" The Bowling 
Green") on the New York Evening Post. 

Morley is the author of ten dissimilar volumes of essays, 
skits, gossip, travel-notes, light verse and serious poetry. The 
Rocking Horse (1919) and Hide and Seek (1920) sink too often 
in their own sentiment; their sweetness is frequently cloying, 
their charm a little too conscious. But Morley's vigor energizes 
his lines and prevents his verses — especially those in the latter 
volume — from becoming tawdry with oversweetness. 

QUICKENING ^ 

Such little, puny things are words in rhyme: 

Poor feeble loops and strokes as frail as hairs; 
You see them printed here, and mark their chime, 

And turn to your more durable affairs. 

Yet on such petty tools the poet dares 
To run his race with mortar, bricks and lime, 

And draws his frail stick to the point, and stares 
To aim his arrow at the heart of Time. 

Intangible, yet pressing, hemming in. 
This measured emptiness engulfs us all. 

And yet he points his paper javelin 
And sees it eddy, waver, turn, and fall. 

And feels, between delight and trouble torn, 

The stirring of a sonnet still unborn. 

1 From Hide and Seek by Christopher Morley. Copyright, 
1920. George H. Doran Company, Publishers. 

367 



Christopher M or ley 
Leslie Nelson Jennings 

Leslie Nelson Jennings was born in 1891 at Ware, Massa- 
chusetts. When he was five years old, he moved to California, 
where he has lived ever since. For a short term, he worked on 
a newspaper but ill health forced him to discontinue this work 
and drove him to the hills. 

Jennings's work is still in a formative stage. His lyrics, 
while personal in theme, are full of the manner and music of 
several of his contemporaries. His sonnets, like those of David 
Morton, show Jennings at his best; they are quiet but never 
dull reflections of loveliness. 



FRUSTRATE 

How futile are these scales in which we weigh 
Pity and passion, and the spirit's need! 
Words — and the veins of desperate peoples bleed! 

Words — and a lark, and hedges white with may! 

O must this rapture and this grief remain 
Uncaptured in our silences? And must 
We stand like stones, less lyrical than dust 

That flowers beneath the benison of rain? 



And if I say, " I love you," can you know. 
Save by the urgent beating of my heart, 
The flame that tears my baflfled lips apart? 

Poor symbols, cracked or broken long ago. 
What witness can you bear that we have tried 
To utter Beauty when our tongues were tied ! 
368 



Maxwell Bodenheim 

Maxwell Bodenheim was born at Natchez, Mississippi, May 
26, 1892. His education, with the exception of grammar school 
training, was achieved under the guidance of the U. S. Army, in 
which Bodenheim served a full enlistment of three years, be- 
ginning in 1910. For a while he studied law and art in 
Chicago, but his mind, fascinated by the new poetry, turned to 
literature. He wrote steadily for five years without having 
a single poem accepted. In 1918, his first volume appeared and 
even those who were puzzled or repelled by Bodenheim's 
complex idiom were forced to recognize its intense individu- 
ality. 

Minna and Myself (1918) reveals, first of all, this poet's 
extreme sensitivity to words. Words, under his hands, have 
unexpected growths; placid nouns and sober adjectives bear 
fantastic fruit. Sometimes he packs his metaphors so close that 
they become inextricably mixed. Sometimes he spins his fan- 
tasies so thin that the cord of coherence snaps and the poem 
frays into ragged and unpatterned ravellings. But, at his best, 
Bodenheim is as clear-headed as he is colorful. 

In Advice (1920), Bodenheim's manner — and his mannerisms 
— are intensified. There is scarcely a phrase that is not 
tricked out with more ornaments and associations than it can 
bear; whole poems sink beneath the weight of their profuse 
decorations. Yet, in spite of his verbal exaggerations, this 
poetry achieves a keen if too ornate delicacy. In the realm of 
the whimsical-grotesque, Bodenheim walks with a light and 
nimble footstep. 



POET TO HIS LOVE 

An old silver church in a forest 
Is my love for you. 
The trees around it 

Are words that I have stolen from your heart. 
369 



Maxwell Bodenheim 

An old silver bell, the last smile you gave, 

Hangs at the top of my church. 

It rings only when you come through the forest 

And stand beside it. 

And then, it has no need for ringing. 

For your voice takes its place. 

OLD AGE 

In me is a little painted square 

Bordered by old shops with gaudy awnings. 

And before the shops sit smoking, open-bloused old men. 

Drinking sunlight. 

The old men are my thoughts; 

And I come to them each evening, in a creaking cart, 

And quietly unload supplies. 

We fill slim pipes and chat 

And inhale scents from pale flowers in the centre of the 
square. . . . 

Strong men, tinkling women, and dripping, squealing 
children 

Stroll past us, or into the shops. 

They greet the shopkeepers and touch their hats or fore- 
heads to me. . . . 

Some evening I shall not return to my people. 

DEATH 

I shall walk down the road; 
I shall turn and feel upon my feet 
370 



Maxwell Bodenheim 

The kisses of Death, like scented rain. 

For Death is a black slave with little silver birds 

Perched in a sleeping v\?reath upon his head. 

He w\\\ tell me, his voice like jewels 

Dropped into a satin bag, 

How he has tip-toed after me down the road, 

His heart made a dark whirlpool with longing for me. 

Then he will graze me with his hands. 

And I shall be one of the sleeping, silver birds 

Between the cold waves of his hair, as he tip-toes on. 

Edwin Curran 

tdwin Curran was born at Zanesville, Ohio, May lo, 1892, 
and was educated at St. Thomas' School in the city of his birth. 
After working as an unskilled laborer in various trades, he 
learned telegraphy in 1914 and has been employed ever since 
as an operator for the Pennsylvania Railroad Company. 

In 1917 he printed a little paper-bound pamphlet of thirty 
pages {First Poems) with this naive note: "Price of this book 
is 35 cents postpaid. Author is 25, unmarried, a beginner and 
needs- publisher. If this volume meets expenses, another, possi- 
bly better, will be issued." Expecting to find poetry of an 
absurd simplicity, one is startled to' find striking images, 
strange pictures and (in such poems as "Soldier's Epitaph" 
and "Sailing of Columbus") lines like: 

We climbed the slippery alleys of the sea 
and many a lyric flash like: 

The stars, like bells, flash down the silver sky . . . 
Ringing like chimes on frozen trees, or cry 
Along the marble ground. 

Second Poems (1920) has a similar beauty mixed with banal- 
ity. Both booklets are a jumble of passion, platitude, bad 

371 



Edwin Curran 

grammar and exaltation. Curran has absolutely no critical 
perceptions; he has little control over his music. For better or 
for worse, his mood controls him. 



AUTUMN 

The music of the autumn winds sings low, 
Down by the ruins of the painted hills, 
Where death lies flaming with a marvelous glow, 
Upon the ash of rose and daffodils. 
But I can find no melancholy here 
To see the naked rocks and thinning trees; 
Earth strips to grapple with the winter year — 
I see her gnarled hills plan for victories! 

I love the earth who goes to battle now. 
To struggle with the wintry whipping storm 
And bring the glorious spring out from the night. 
I see earth's muscles bared, her battle brow, 
And am not sad, but feel her marvelous charm 
As splendidly she plunges in the fight. 

THE PAINTED HILLS OF ARIZONA 

The rainbows all lie crumpled on these hills. 
The red dawns scattered on their colored sills. 
These hills have caught the lightning in its flight, 
Caught colors from the skies of day and night 
And shine with shattered stars and suns; they hold 
Dyed yellow, red and purple, blue and gold. 
372 



Edwin Curran 

Red roses seem within their marble blown, 

A painted garden chiseled in the stone; 

The rose and violet trickling through their veins, 

Where they drop brilliant curtains to the plains — 

A ramp of rock and granite, jeweled and brightening, 

Like some great colored wall of lightning! 



Edna St. Vincent Millay 

Edna St. Vincent Millay, possibly the most gifted of the 
younger lyricists, was born February 22, 1892, at Rockland, 
Maine. After a childhood spent almost entirely in New 
England, she attended Vassar College, from which she was 
graduated in 191 7. Since that time she has lived in New York 
City. Besides her keenly individual lyrics. Miss Millay has 
written a quantity of short stories under various pseudonyms, 
has translated several songs, and has been connected with the 
Provincetown Players both as playwright and performer. 

Although the bulk of her poetry is not large, the quality of 
it approaches and sometimes attains greatness. Her first long 
poem, " Renascence," was the outstanding feature of The Lyric 
Year (1912), an anthology which revealed many new names. 
" Renascence " was written when Miss Millay was scarcely 
nineteen; it remains today one of the most remarkable poems 
of this generation. Beginning like a child's aimless verse it 
proceeds, with a calm lucidity, to an amazing climax. It is as 
if a child had, in the midst of its ingenuousness, uttered some 
terrific truth. The sheer cumulative power of this poem is "ur- 
passed only by its beauty. 

Renascence, the name of Miss Millay's first volume, was pub- 
lished in 1917. It is full of the same passion as its title poem; 
here is a hunger for beauty so intense that no delight is great 
enough to give the soul peace. Such poems as " God's World " 
and the unnamed sonnets vibrate with this rapture. Magic 

373 



Edna St. Vincent Millay 

burns from the simplest of her lines. Figs from Thistles 
(1920) is a far more sophisticated booklet. Sharp and cyn- 
ically brilliant, Miss Millay's craftsmanship no less than her 
intuition saves these poems from mere cleverness. 

Second April (1921) is an intensification of her lyrical gift 
tinctured with an increasing sadness and disillusion. Her 
poignant poetic play, Aria da Capo, first performed by the 
Provincetown Players in New York, was published in The 
Monthly Chapbook (Harold Monro, England) ; the issue of 
July, 1920, being devoted to it. 



GOD'S WORLD 

O world, I cannot hold thee close enough! 

Thy winds, thy wide grey skies! 

Thy mists that roll and rise! 
Thy woods, this autumn day, that ache and sag 
And all but cry with colour! That gaunt crag 
To crush! To lift the lean of that black bluff! 
World, World, I cannot get thee close enough! 

Long have I known a glory in it all, 

But never knew I this; 

Here such a passion is 
As stretcheth me apart. Lord, I do fear 
Thou'st made the world too beautiful this year. 
My soul is all but out of me, — let fall 
No burning leaf; prithee, let no bird call. 



374 



Edna St. Vincent Millay 

RENASCENCE 

All I could see from where I stood 
Was three long mountains and a wood; 
I turned and looked another way, 
And saw three islands in a bay. 
So with my eyes I traced the line 
Of the horizon, thin and fine, 
Straight around till I was come 
Back to where I'd started from; 
And all I saw from where I stood 
Was three long mountains and a wood. 
Over these things I could not see; 
These were the things that bounded me ; 
And I could touch them with my hand, 
Almost, I thought, from where I stand. 
And all at once things seemed so small 
My breath came short, and scarce at all. 
But, sure, the sky is big, I said; 
Miles and miles above my head; 
So here upon my back I'll lie 
And look my fill into the sky. 
And so I looked, and, after all. 
The sky was not so very tall. 
The sky, I said, must somewhere stop, 
And — sure enough!- — I see the top! 
The sky, I thought, is not so grand ; 
I 'most could touch it with my hand! 
And, reaching up my hand to try, 
I screamed to feel it touch the sky. 
375 



Edna St. Vincent Mill ay 

I screamed, and — Id! — Infinity 

Came down and settled over me; 

And, pressing of the Undefined 

The definition on my mind. 

Held up before my eyes a glass 

Through which my shrinking sight did pass 

Until it seemed I must behold 

Immensity made manifold; 

Whispered to me a word whose sound 

Deafened the air for worlds around, 

And brought unn^fBed to my ears 

The gossiping of friendly spheres. 

The creaking of the tented sky. 

The ticking of Eternity. 



I saw and heard, and knew at last 
The How and Why of all things, past, 
And present, and forevermore. 
The universe, cleft to the core. 
Lay open to my probing sense 
That, sick'ning, I would fain pluck thence 
But could not, — nay! But needs must suck 
At the great wound, and could not pluck 
My lips away till I had drawn 
All venom out. — Ah, fearful pawn! 
For my omniscience paid I toll 
In infinite remorse of soul. 
All sin was of my sinning, all 
Atoning mine, and mine the gall 
376 



Edna St. Vincent Millay 

Of all regret. Mine was the weight 
Of every brooded wrong, the hate 
That stood behind each envious thrust, 
Mine every greed, mine every lust. 
And all the while for every grief, 
Each suffering, I craved relief 
With individual desire, — 
Craved all in vain ! And felt fierce fire 
About a thousand people crawl; 
Perished with each, — then mourned for all! 
A man was starving in Capri; 
He moved his eyes and looked at me; 
I felt his gaze, I heard his moan, 
And knew his hunger as my own. 
I saw at sea a great fog-bank 
Between two ships that struck and sank; 
A thousand screams the heavens smote; 
And every scream tore through my throat. 
No hurt I did not feel, no death 
That was not mine; mine each last breath 
That, crying, met an answering cry 
From the compassion that was I. 
All suffering mine, and mine its rod; 
Mine, pity like the pity of God. 
Ah, awful weight! Infinity 
Pressed down upon the finite Me! 
My anguished spirit, like a bird. 
Beating against my lips I heard; 
Yet lay the weight so close about 
There was no room for it without. 
377 



Edna St. Vincent Millay 

And so beneath the weight lay I 
And suffered death, but could not die. 

Deep in the earth I rested now; 
Cool is its hand upon the brow 
And soft its breast beneath the head 
Of one who is so gladly dead. 
And all at once, and over all, 
The pitying rain began to fall; 

God, I cried, give me new birth. 
And put me back upon the earth! 
Upset each cloud's gigantic gourd 
And let the heavy rain, down-poured 
In one big torrent, set me free. 
Washing my grave away from me! 

1 ceased; and, through the breathless hush 
That answered me, the far-off rush 

Of herald wings came whispering 
Like music down the vibrant string 
Of my ascending prayer, and — crash! 
Before the wild wind's whistling lash 
The startled storm-clouds reared on high 
And plunged in terror down the sky, 
And the big rain in one black wave 
Fell from the sky and struck my grave. 

I know not how such things can be 
I only know there came to me 
A fragrance such as never clings 
To aught save happy living things; 
378 



Edna St. Vincent Millay 

A sound as of some joyous elf 
Singing sweet songs to please himself, 
And, through and over everything, 
A sense of glad aw^akening. 
The grass, a tip-toe at my ear. 
Whispering to me I could hear; 
I felt the rain's cool finger-tips 
Brushed tenderly across my lips, 
Laid gently on my sealed sight, 
And all at once the heavy night 
Fell from my eyes and I could see, — 
I lay and heard each pattering hoof 
Upon my lowly, thatched roof. 
And seemed to love the sound far rpore 
Than ever I had done before. 
For rain it hath a friendly sound 
To one who's six feet underground; 
And scarce the friendly voice or face: 
A grave is such a quiet place. 

The rain, I said, is kind to come 
And speak to me in my new home. 
I would I were alive again 
To kiss the fingers of the rain. 
To drink into my eyes the shine 
Of every slanting silver line. 
To catch the freshened, fragrant breeze 
From drenched and dripping apple-trees. 
For soon the shower will be done. 
And then the broad face of the sun 
379 



Edna St. Vincent Millay 

Will laugh above the rain-soaked earth 
Until the world with answering mirth 
Shakes joyously, and each round drop 
Rolls, twinkling, from its grass-blade top. 
How can I bear it; buried here. 
While overhead the sky grows clear 
And blue again after the storm? 
O, multi-colored, multiform. 
Beloved beauty over me. 
That I shall never, never see 
Again! Spring-silver, autumn-gold. 
That I shall never more behold! 
Sleeping your myriad magics through, 
Close-sepulchred away from you! 
A drenched and dripping apple-tree, 
A last long line of silver rain, 
A sky grown clear and blue again. 
And as I looked a quickening gust 
Of wind blew up to me and thrust 
Into my face a miracle 
Of orchard-breath, and with the smell, — 
I know not how such things can be! — 
I breathed my soul back into me. 
Ah! Up then from the ground sprang I 
And hailed the earth with such a cry 
As is not heard save from a man 
Who has been dead, and lives again. 
About the trees my arms I wound ; 
Like one gone mad I hugged the ground; 
380 



Edna St. Vincent Millay 

I raised my quivering arms on high; 
I laughed and laughed into the sky, 
Till at my throat a strangling sob 
Caught fiercely, and a great heart-throb 
Sent instant tears into my eyes; 

God, I cried, no dark disguise 
Can e'er hereafter hide from me 
Thy radiant identity! 

Thou canst not move across the grass 
But my quick eyes will see Thee pass, 
Nor speak, however silently, 
But my hushed voice will answer Thee. 

1 know the path that tells Thy way 
Through the cool eve of every day; 
God, I can push the grass apart 
And lay my finger on Thy heart! 



The world stands out on either side 
No wider than the heart is wide ; 
Above the world is stretched the sky, — 
No higher than the soul is high. 
The heart can push the sea and land 
Farther away on either hand; 
The soul can split the sky in two. 
And Lt the face of God shine through. 
But East and West will pinch the heart 
That cannot keep them pushed apart; 
And he whose soul is flat — the sky 
Will cave in on him by and by. 
381 



Edna St. Vincent Millay 

PITY ME NOT 

Pity me not because the light of day 
At close of day no longer walks the sky ; 
Pity me not for beauties passed away 
From field and thicket as the year goes by; 
Pity me not the waning of the moon, 
Nor that the ebbing tide goes out to sea, 
Nor that a man's desire is hushed so soon, 
And you no longer look with love on me. 

This have I known always : love is no more 
Than the wide blossom which the wind assails; 
Than the great tide that treads the shifting shore, 
Strewing fresh wreckage gathered in the gales. 
Pity me that the heart is slow to learn 
What the swift mind beholds at every turn. 

I SHALL GO BACK 

I shall go back again to the bleak shore 
And build a little shanty on the sand 
In such a way that the extremest band 
Of brittle seaweed will escape my door 
But by a yard or two, and nevermore 
Shall I return to take you by the hand; 
I shall be gone to what I understand 
And happier than I ever was before. 

The love that stood a moment in your eyes. 
The words that lay a moment on your tongue, 
382 



Edna St. Vincent Millay 

Are one with all that in a moment dies, 

A little under-said and over-sung; 

But I shall find the sullen rocks and skies 

Unchanged from what they were when I was young. 



THE PEAR TREE 

In this squalid, dirty dooryard, 

Where the chickens scratch and run, 

White, incredible, the pear tree 
Stands apart and takes the sun. 

Mindful of the eyes upon it. 

Vain of its new holiness. 
Like the waste-man's little daughter 

In her first communion dress. 



WILD SWANS 

I looked in my heart while the wild swans went over; — 
And what did I see I had not seen before? 
Only a question less or a question more; 

Nothing to match the flight of wild birds flying. 

Tiresome heart, forever living and dying! 

House without air! I leave you and lock your door! 

Wild swans, come over the town, come over 

The town again, trailing your legs and crying! 



383 



Mary Carolyn Davies 

Mary Carolyn Davies was born at Sprague, Washington, and 
was educated in the schools at and about Portland, Oregon. 
At college (the University of California) she won the Emily 
Chamberlin Cook prize for Poetry in 1912, being the first 
freshman to win it. In the same year, she established another 
precedent by being the first woman to win the Bohemian Club 
prize. With the proceeds, the young poet went to New York, 
arriving with the remnants of her fortune — four dollars and 
eighty-five cents. 

The long struggle with the city began. Miss Davies wrote 
short stories, two serials, reams of sentimental verses — any- 
thing to keep alive. She turned finally to verse, chiefly because 
" when the rent is due there's no time to write a story, only 
verse can save one in time." 

Her work divides itself into two distinct classes: the hack- 
work which she does for a living and the genuine poetry which 
she creates for its own sake. Her first volume The Drums in 
Our Street (1918) was a mixture of loud bombast and quiet 
beauty, of blatant war-verse and unaffected lyrics. Youth 
Riding (1919), although as uneven as its predecessor, is simpler 
and surer. The poems in 'vers libre are clearly musical, and 
her eight-line lyrics are particularly wistful and delicate. 



THE DAY BEFORE APRIL ^ 

The day before April, 

Alone, alone, 
I walked in the woods 

And I sat on a stone. 

1 Reprinted by permission of the Publishers, The Macmillan 
Company. From Youth Riding by Mary Carolyn Davies. 
384 



Mary Carolyn Davies 

I sat on a broad stone 
And sang to the birds. 

The tune was God's making 
But I made the words. 



THE APPLE TREE SAID:^ 

My apples are heavy upon me. 

It was the Spring; 
And proud was I of my petals, 

Nor dreamed this thing: 

That joy could grow to a burden, 

Or beauty could be 
Changed from snow-light to heavy 

To humble me. 



Winifred Welles 

Winifred Welles was born at Norwich Town, Connecticut, 
January 26, 1893, and educated in the vicinity of her home. 

Her frail and delicately fashioned lyrics are the distinguish- 
ing feature of The Hesitant Heart (1920). This first volume, 
so appropriately named, has a frank tenderness that never 
grows maudlin, a wistful introspection that never forgets to 
sing. 

1 Reprinted by permission of the publishers, The Macmillan 
Company. From Youth Riding by Mary Carolyn Davies. 

385 



Winifred Welles 

FROM A CHINESE VASE 

Rooming the lonely garden, he and I 
Pursue each other to the fountain's brim, 
And there grow quiet — ^woman and butterfly — 
The frail clouds beckon me, the flowers tempt him. 

My thoughts are rose-like, beautiful and bright, 
Folded precise as petals are, and wings 
Uplift my dreaming suddenly in flight, 
And fill my soul with jagged colorings. 

The waters tangle like a woman's hair 
Above the dim reflection of a face — 
He thinks those are his own lips laughing there. 
His own breasts curving under silk and lace. 

How shall we know our real selves, he and I, 
Which is the woman, which the butterfly? 

HUMILIATION 

How nakedly an animal 

Lies down on earth to die. 
Unmindful of the shining air, 

And unashamed of sky. 

But men and women under roofs 
Draw shades and hush the floor, 

And furtively they lay their dead 
Behind a darkened door 
386 



Winifred Welles 



LOVE SONG FROM NEW ENGLAND 

In every solemn tree the wind 

Has rung a little lonesome bell, 
As sweet and clear, as cool and kind 

As my voice bidding you farewell. 

This is an hour that gods have loved 

To snatch with bare, bright hands and hold. 

Mine, with a gesture, grey and gloved. 
Dismiss it from me in the cold. 

Closely as some dark-shuttered house 

I keep my light. How should you know. 

That, as you turn beneath brown boughs, 
My heart is breaking in the snow? 



Herbert S. Gorman 

Herbert S. Gorman was born at Springfield, Massachusetts, 
January i, 1893. After attending Technical High School he 
became an actor for two seasons, deserting the stage for the 
newspaper. He became assistant literary and dramatic editor of 
the Springfield Union, reporter on the New York Sun and re- 
viewer for the New York Post, The Freeman and other jour- 
nals. 

His first book. The Fool of Love (1920), shows, above an 
indebtedness to E. A. Robinson, a keen talent and fresh per- 
sonality. 



387 



Herbert S. Gorman 



THE FANATIC 

Well, here it is: you call for me: I come, 
But with an eagerness not quite my own; 

Propelled by that decisive marytrdom 

That pleased the saints upon their faggot throne. 

You see them smiling in the cruel flame 
That exqusitely licks their willing limbs, 

And finding some sad pleasure in the game 
Not quite embodied in their lusty hymns. 

And so I come: and though I go, be sure 
That I will come again to-mofrow, too; 

And, Love's fanatic, hasten to endure 
The littleness that is so great in you. 

I am the weakling of that helpless strength 
That throws this broken body you despise 

Before your carelessness, to find at length 

The faith that sleeps behind your faithless eyes. 



Babette Deutsch 

Babette Deutsch, one of the most promising of the younger 
poet-critics, was born September 22, 1895, in New York City. 
She received her B.A. at Barnard College in 1917, doing sub- 
sequent work at the new School for Social Research. Since 
1916, a year before she took her degree. Miss Deutsch has been 
contributing poems and critical articles to The Neiu Republic, 
The Dial, The Yale Review, etc. 

388 



Babette Deutsch 

Banners (1919) is the title of her remarkable first book. Tht 
rich emotional content is matched by the poet's intellectual skill. 
Unusually sensitive, most of these lines strive for — and attain — 
a high seriousness. 



THE DEATH OF A CHILD ^ 

Are you at ease now, 

Do you suck content 

From death's dark nipple between your wan lips? 

Now that the fever of the day is spent 

And anguish slips 

From the small limbs. 

And they lie lapped in rest, 

The young head pillowed soft upon that indurate breast. 

No, you are quiet. 

And forever, 

Tho for us the silence is so loud with tears, 

Wherein we hear the dreadful-footed years 

Echoing, but your quick laughter never. 

Never your stumbling run, your sudden face 

Thrust in bright scorn upon our solemn fears. 

Now the dark mother holds you close. . . . O, you 

We loved so. 

How you lie, 

So strangely still, unmoved so utterly 

Dear yet, but oh a little alien too. 

1 From Banners by Babette Deutsch. Copyright, 1919. 
George H. Doran Co., Publishers. 

389 



Babette Deutsch 



IN A MUSEUM 

Here stillness sounds like echoes in a tomb. 
The light falls cold upon these antique toys 
Whereby men sought to turn the scales of doom: 
Jade gods, a ritual of rigid boys. 
Warm blood was spent for this unwindowed stone 
Tinct with the painted pleasures of the dead; 
For secrets of unwithering flesh and bone — 
With these old Egypt's night was comforted. 

We lean upon the glass, our curious eyes 
Staring at death, three thousand years remote. 
And vanity, the worm that never dies. 
Feeds on your silver ring and Pharaoh's coat. 
And are these heartbeats, then, less perilous? 
Since death is close, and death is death for us. 

Alter Brody 

Alter Brody was born at Kartushkiya-Beroza, Province of 
Grodno, Russia, November i, 1895. He came to New York 
City at the age of eight and, after a cursory schooling, wrote 
translations for certain Jewish and American newspapers. His 
first poems appeared in The Seven Arts in 1916-17. 

In /I Family Album (1918) one sees the impress of a tense 
and original mind, of imagination that is fed by strengthening 
fact, of sight that is sharpened by insight. Many of Brody's 
lines are uncouth and awkward; what music he achieves is 
mostly fortuitous, the melody accidental. And yet his pages 
are filled with a picturesque honesty and uncompromising 
beauty. Much of this work is an interpretation of the modern 

390 



Alter Brady 

world against a background of old dreams: young America 
seen through the eyes of old Russia. It is a romantic realism 
that uplifts such poems as " Kartushkiya-Beroza " (a record of 
boyhood which is one of Brody's finest achievements though, 
unfortunately, too long to quote), "A Row of Poplars: Central 
Park," " Ghetto Twilight " and the poignant " Lamentations." 
It is, to be more accurate, a romanticism that springs from 
reality and, after a fantastic flight, settles back with a new 
vision. 

A CITY PARK 

Timidly 

Against a background of brick tenements 

Some trees spread their branches 

Skyward. 

They are thin and sapless, 

They are bent and weary — 

Tamed with captivity; 

And they huddle behind the fence 

Swaying helplessly before the wind, 

Forward and backward, 

Like a group of panicky d^er 

Caught in a cage. 



SEARCHLIGHTS 

Tingling shafts of light, 
Like gigantic staffs 
Brandished by blind, invisible hands, 
Cross and recross each other in the sky, 

391 



Alter Brody 

Frantically — 

Groping among the stars — stubbing themselves against 

the bloated clouds — 
Tapping desperately for a sure foothold 
In the fluctuating mists. 

Calm-eyed and inaccessible. 

The stars peer through the blue fissures of the sky, 
Unperturbed among the panic of scurrying beams; 
Twinkling with a cold, acrid merriment. 

GHETTO TWILIGHT 

An infinite weariness comes into the faces of the old 

tenements. 
As they stand massed together on the block. 
Tall and thoughtfully silent. 
In the enveloping twilight. 
Pensively, 

They eye each other across the street, 
Through their dim windows — 
With a sad recognizing stare ; 
Watching the red glow fading in the distance. 
At the end of the street, 
Behind the black church spires; 
Watching the vague sky lowering overhead, 
Purple with clouds of colored smoke; 
From the extinguished sunset; 

Watching the tired faces coming home from work — 
Like dry-breasted hags 

Welcoming their children to their withered arms. 

392 



Stephen Vincent Benet 

Stephen Vincent Benet, the younger blrother of William Rose 
Benet, was born at Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, in July, 1898. 
He was educated in various parts of the country, graduating 
from Yale in 1919. 

At seventeen he published a small book containing six 
dramatic portraits, Fi've Men and Pompey (1915), a remarkable 
set of monologues which, in spite of distinct traces of Browning 
and Alfred Noyes, was little short of astounding, coming from 
a schoolboy. In Benet's next volume. Young Adventure (1918), 
one hears something more than the speech of an infant prodigy; 
the precocious facility has developed into a keen and indi- 
vidual vigor. 

Heavens and Earth (1920), the most representative collec- 
tion, has a greater imaginative sweep. Like his brother, the 
younger Benet is at his best in the decoratively grotesque; his 
fancy exults in running the scales between the whimsically 
bizarre and the lightly diabolic. 

PORTRAIT OF A BOY 

After the whipping, he crawled into bed ; 
Accepting the harsh fact with no great weeping. 
How funny uncle's hat had looked striped red! 
He chuckled silently. The moon came, sweeping 
A black frayed rag of tattered cloud before 
In scorning; very pure and pale she seemed. 
Flooding his bed with radiance. On the floor 
Fat motes danced. He sobbed ; closed his eyes and 
dreamed. 

Warm sand flowed round him. Blurts of crimson light 
Splashed the white grains like blood. Past the cave's 

mouth 
Shone with a large fierce splendor, wildly bright, 
The crooked constellations of the South; 

393 



Stephen Vincent Benet 

Here the Cross swung; and there, affronting Mars, 
The Centaur stormed aside a froth of stars. 
Within, great casks like wattled aldermen 
Sighed of enormous feasts, and cloth of gold 
Glowed on the walls like hot desire. Again, 
Beside webbed purples from some galleon's hold, 
A black chest bore the skull and bones in white 
Above a scrawled " Gunpowder! " By the flames, 
Decked out in crimson, gemmed with syenite, 
Hailing their fellows by outrageous names 
The pirates sat and diced. Their eyes were moons. 
"Doubloons!" they said. The words crashed gold. 
Doubloons ! " 



Hilda Conkling 

Hilda Conkling, most gifted of recent infant prodigies, was 
born at Catskill-on-Hudson, New York, October 8, 1910. The 
daughter of Grace Hazard Conkling (see page 207), she came 
to Northampton, Massachusetts, with her mother when she was 
three years old and has lived there since, a normal out-of- 
doors little girl. 

Hilda began to write poems — or rather, to talk them — at the 
age of four. Since that time, she has created one hundred and 
fifty little verses, many of them astonishing in exactness of 
phrase and beauty of vision. Hilda " tells " her poem and 
her mother copies it down, arranges the line-divisions and 
reads it to the child for correction. Conceding a possible half- 
conscious shaping by Mrs. Conkling, the quality which shines 
behind all of Hilda's little facets of loveliness is a straight- 
forward ingenuousness, a child-like but sweeping fantasy. 

Poems by a Little Girl (1920), published when Hilda was a 
little more than nine years old, is a detailed proof of this 

394 



Hilda Conkling 

delightful quality. Every poem bears its own stamp of unaf- 
fected originality; "Water," "Hay-Cock," and a dozen others 
are startling in their precision and a power of painting the 
familiar in unsuspected colors. This child not only sees, feels 
and hears with the concentration of a child-artist, she com- 
municates the results of her perceptions with the sensitivity of 
a master-craftsman. She hears a chickadee talking 

The way smooth bright pebbles 

Drop into water. 
Everything is extraordinarily vivid and fanciful to her keen 
senses. The rooster's comb is "gay as a parade;" he has 
" pearl trinkets on his feet " and 

The short feathers smooth along his back 

Are the dark color of wet rocks. 

Or the rippled green of ships 

When I look at their sides through water. 
She observes: 

The water came in with a wavy look 
Like a spider's web. 
It is too early for judgments — even for a prophecy. It is 
impossible to guess how much Hilda's vision will be distorted 
by knowledge and the traditions that will accompany her 
growth. One can only hold one's breath and hope for the 
preservation of so remarkable a talent. 

WATER 

The world turns softly 
Not to spill its lakes and rivers. 
The water is held in its arms 
And the sky is held in the water. 
What is water, 
That pours silver, 
And can hold the sky? 
395 



Hilda Conkling 



HAY-COCK 

This is another kind of sweetness 

Shaped like a bee-hive: 

This is the hive the bees have left, 

It is from this clover-heap 

They took away the honey 

For the other hive! 



THE OLD BRIDGE 

The old bridge has a wrinkled face. 
He bends his back 
For us to go over. 
He moans and weeps 
But we do not hear. 
Sorrow stands in his face 
For the heavy weight and worry 
Of people passing. 

The trees drop their leaves into the water; 
The sky nods to him. 
The leaves float down like small ships 
On the blue surface 
Which is the sky. 
He is not always sad: 
He smiles to see the ships go down 
And the little children 
Playing on the river banks. 
396 



Hilda Conk ling 

I KEEP WONDERING 

I saw a mountain, 

And he was like Wotan looking at himself in the water. 

I saw a cockatoo, 

And he was like sunset clouds. 

Even leaves and little stones 

Are different to my eyes sometimes. 

I keep wondering through and through my heart 

Where all the beautiful things in the world 

Come from. 

And while I wonder 

They go on being beautiful. 